[music]  hello, my name is vaidya nathan, and  we learn together how to trade financial markets.  now, firstly, why is it important in today's day and age?  in a society governed passively by free market and  free elections, organized greed tends to defeat disorganized democracy.  that's because what happens on wall street does not stay inside the four walls of  the wall street.  it's said that if wall street catches a cold,  the rest of the world's economy gets the flu.  if you think of a company, like, say, walmart, where all of us at one point or  the other go shopping, the earnings of walmart is as much a concern or  an issue in the streets of, or it affects us people in the streets of mumbai or  brussels as much as they do in midtown manhattan.  and the matter where you and i work or you and i shop and  play right here on main street.  in a world where capitalism is king and free enterprises is queen,  most of our jobs depends on corporate profitability.  the cereal boxes above the refrigerator, the bananas that are dangling on the hook  on the kitchen counter, the running shoes that you've kept under the bed.  the gasoline you pump into the suv, and  the ready-made dinner you pick up on your way back home from work.  all of them make their way into our lives because there are companies out  there who see an opportunity to make a profit by providing them to us.  bringing products to our doorsteps also requires people like you and  me to design, to produce, to market, and to develop, which means jobs.  jobs mean paychecks.  paychecks empower consumers.  and robust consumer spending translates into more profits for  the economy, ie, the mainstreet.  now profits for the mainstreet is fine, for corporations it's fine, but  what about you and me?  paychecks rarely pave the way to financial freedom for people like you and me.  now it's what we do with the money that we pay ourselves which is our savings that  sets us on one of the many different paths to that destination of financial security.  i've heard people often say that money can't buy happiness.  i think that may be true.  but i also think that it can solve 95% of the problems that make us unhappy.  and this is where this course enters the picture and hopefully your life.  i started my career with jp morgan as an investment banker.  and my wall street experience has convinced me that common people could  shore up their financial security by investing wisely in financial markets  if only they could get over the intimidation hump that is there.  and i'm very well acquainted with the intimidation hump and  how formidable the seemingly foreign world of wall street and  investment can appear, because i started my journey from the very same square.  [inaudible] travels my journey from the wall street to academia.  now, overcoming the language barrier is always a good place to  begin when you're embarking on a journey to a new land.  and the world of investment is no different.  learning the language of investment is as much,  i think is the same, except that it's a little easier,  a tad easier than becoming fluent in a completely unfamiliar language.  because the investment language is still based on english after all.  the language though is different because wall street has always been a place that  prides itself on smoke and mirrors.  the players on wall street have confusing language and  structures that can be a bit intimidating for non-finance professionals.  even the most basic language that is used is a little absurd.  you don't buy, you actually go long.  you don't sell, you actually go short.  and one of the funny things about wall street is that every time one person buys,  of course there is another person who is selling.  the funny part is that both think that they are clever.  so in this course, we'll not discuss should you buy a particular stock or  sell a particular stock and feel very clever about it.  what we'll talk about is how financial markets function.  we'll understand wall street by using a very healthy dose of  what i call as sesame street.  sesame street, by the way,  is a long-running american children's television serial.  it's a series for children.  so we'll use simple,  basic language to understand financial market jargon and concepts.  so, you'll understand the world's true economic sector, the wall street,  how it functions, where billions of dollars change hands each day.  and thousands of companies are traded, and millions of lives are affected.  we'll start with equity markets.  we'll understand what a stock exchange means in simple language,  in sesame street language.  we'll figure out what kind of companies get traded.  we'll talk about business cycles.  we'll talk about what do bull markets mean, bear markets mean.  we'll talk about stock market tickers in terms like volume, beta, eps.  we'll understand risk and  return, and we'll try to understand how risk is reduced by diversification.  we'll look at the different ways in which you can diversify your portfolio.  we'll discuss investment styles of legendary investors such as warren buffett  and peter lynch.  we talk about the importance of having a training strategy and discuss ways to  use the generally accepted trading rules to essentially build a portfolio.  the second part is currency markets.  we'll try to understand the size of the fx market related to other markets.  and we will try to understand terms like what liquidity means, and  how it affects currency markets.  we'll understand the correlation between currency markets and  other markets such as equity, bonds, gold, oil.  we'll discuss the mechanics of currency trading, and  we'll become conversant with currency trading terms.  we'll talk about margin balances, liquidation.  we'll understand what do bid prices mean, offer prices mean, spreads mean.  we'll understand short-term, medium-term, and long-term trading and  how to execute such trades.  we'll discuss the importance of a trading plan, what goes into a trading plan,  as also why people fail to follow a trading plan.  we'll demonstrate how to trade using the click and deal features of a platform.  we'll understand the different types of orders,  such as take profit orders, limit orders, stop-loss orders,  trailing stop-loss orders, one cancels the other orders, contingent orders.  and you'll also know how to place those orders and which order to place when.  now moving to the third part, bond markets,  we'll try to understand how bond markets function.  and we'll try to differentiate between the different types of bonds that are traded.  we'll try to explain why bond prices fluctuate.  we'll talk about the concepts of yield and how bond prices change with yields and  vice versa.  we'll understand the workings of rating agencies and  how they asses grade worthiness of a bond issue based on grading.  we'll explain the characteristics of the government bond market,  the agency bond market, the municipal bond market.  finally, the fourth part, which we will be talking about economic  data that financial market participants follow and how it impacts stocks,  how it impacts foreign exchange markets, and how it impacts bond markets.  we will talk about some very important economic indicators such as the employment  situation, the consumer confidence index, the industrial production and  capacity utilization.  we'll talk about consumer price index.  we'll talk about producer price index, housing start reports,  retail sales, manufacturing service, and  also very familiar things like gross domestic product and monetary policy.  by the end of the course i can assure you that you will be able to understand  the financial pages of a newspaper or a magazine.  or you'll also be able to read the stock, fx, and bonds quotes from a financial  newspaper like the wall street journal or the financial times.  hopefully the course will give you a very good introduction to financial markets.  so, let the journey begin.  [music] 
learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you will be able to understand the bond market.  and you will also be able to differentiate between the various types of bonds.  bonds, if you were to look at a newspaper like the financial times or  any financial newspaper, you'll find a lot of news articles related to stocks.  but rarely, if ever, do you find mention of bonds.  so bonds are widely regarded as  the most conservative investments that you can make, and  generally they do not experience a lot of dramatic changes in prices day to day.  so they don't make for very exciting reporting, and  that's one of the reasons why you don't find bonds being reported  in the newspapers all day.  but that being said, bond markets are actually larger than stock markets.  in recent years, a majority of corporate financing,  which can either happen through debt or through equity,  a lot of corporate financing has been accomplished through bonds.  moreover though this is not very well known, but  as many dudes own bonds as they own stocks.  so bonds are issued by various entities like corporations,  state governments, local governments, their agencies, for instance,  in the us the federal government, the united states government issues bonds.  its agencies, the federal agencies issues bonds and so on.  now professional bond traders typically use one word designations for  the bond of each issue.  which are, for instance,  if it's a corporate bond, okay, we'll just say corporates.  if it's a municipal bond, bond traders would call that municipals.  if it's a government bond, we say governments.  if it's a federal agency that's issued the bond, we call it agencies, and so on.  while each of these bonds have unique characteristics.  for instance, corporate bonds are different from municipal bonds from  government bonds, but all of them have one basic function,  which is that they are all formal i owe you.  in which the issuer typically promises to repay the total amount  borrowed at a predetermined date.  so in addition, the issuer will also mentions what  is a compensation that the bond holder will receive for renting out his capital.  and this composition is typically paid on a semiannual basis and  more often than not these are fixed interest rates  that are paid during the years in which the bond is owned.  so in the language of bond's the total amount to be repaid is called  variously in different forms as either the principle amount, or the face value or  the par value.  the repayment date is typically known as the maturity date.  the interest rate of the bond is called a coupon.  okay, and we come to in very shortly we talk about why it is called a coupon and  the period of time in which the bond is outstanding, is called as a term.  and all this information is printed on the face of a bond.  so if you look at a bond certificate,  you'll find all that information in the bond certificate.  now in the past,  bond certificates would come with coupons attached, so you'll have  a certificate with perforations of coupons and which your coupons are typically  periodically clipped from the bond certificate and presented for payment.  and that's how interest payments came to be known as coupons,  which have now become synonymous with fixed interest payments.  [cough] there are two ways in which bonds can be owned.  they can be owned in a registered format,  in which case the corporation which has issued the bond actually has,  in its registry, the name of the owner of the bond.  or it could be in bearer form, in which case whoever has the bond with him or  her is essentially considered the owner.  most corporate bonds are registered bonds while municipals and  government bonds are issued as bearer bonds.  a bond certificate then is essentially a certificate of indebtedness,  spelling out the terms of the issuer's terms to repay the money.  sometimes, this promise of repaying  is reinforced by collateral such as equipment or property.  but usually bonds offer only what is called as the full faith and  credit of the borrower.  sometimes, bonds are also called as debentures,  these are essentially uncollateralized iou's, in which case  the issuer is not putting any collateral of plant or machinery or equipment.  in terms of the risk, the obligations  issued by the government are regarded as the safest investment that is possible,  after all as the saying goes, only the government has the ability to print money. 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you will know how stock markets originated and  you will also understand how stock exchanges function.  the largest business in the world.  each working, billions of dollars exchange hands in the world's stock market's one,  markets and currency markets.  actually, making trillions of dollars, it's not billions anymore.  trading these markets is by far the largest business on the planet.  and yet, if you were to ask the average woman on the street,  why do we have bull markets or why do we have bear markets?  you'll receive a response,  as if only economists or traders are supposed to know all this.  the average person has absolutely no clue, as to what drives financial markets.  even more surprising is the fact that a lot of them seem to want to understand  financial markets, but haven't had the time or the opportunity to do so.  this course is precisely for that reason,  to make financial markets accessible to a wide variety of working professionals and  students who constitute the audience for coursera.  in the process of understanding financial markets,  if you can make some money in the process, so much the better.  at the end of the day, everybody wants to make money.  so whether you're a working professional or working at mcdonald's or  working in wall street, understanding financial markets is one of the key  drivers to actually empowering yourself to take charge of your financial future,  because you can actually invest well and invest well into your financial future.  so whether you're a student or a working professional, everybody,  i think in this day and  age needs to have a basic understanding of how the financial markets function.  and how the stock markets work, because financial markets have  become almost an integral part of our lives in today's day and age.  you also need to have a basic understanding of the market  before you start training, because knowing how to manage own  money gives you a lot of control on your financial future.  so, this course will teach you about the different  investment choices available to you.  how the stock market works?  how to evaluate stocks and how to build, and manage a balanced portfolio?  successful investing requires constant education and a discipline approach.  so, let's get started.  so, let's actually begin from the beginning.  let's first understand what a stock exchange is,  what exactly is wall street and the new york stock exchange,  you have probably heard these terms, these words thousands of times.  but unless you are an active trader,  these words might have gone in one ear and out the other.  stock exchanges are simply organizations that allow people  the ability to buy and sell stocks.  think of a stock exchange,  as a cross between a neighborhood flea market and an option.  a flea market is a central gathering place for buyers and  sellers of different products.  the auction format ensures that whatever is being bought and sold is being done so  at the best possible price for both the buyer, and the seller.  each day at the exchange, the exchange brings together  a new group of individuals with different expectations and  different amounts of money and qualities or products to sell.  these differences result in slight price changes each day.  the stock exchanges through the use of computers and  it allow simultaneous auctions to proceed for  each stock that trades on the exchange every second that the exchanges are open.  or when the buyers and sellers agree on a price, a trade occurs.  when buyers and sellers don't agree on a price, the trade does not occur,  but the computer shows what price the buyers are willing to pay and  what price sellers are willing to sell.  the stock exchanges provide a convenient environment that allows buyers and  sellers to act quickly and easily.  the ever-increasing sophistication and speed of information systems,  and softwares helps all investors and stockholders to receive up to  the second prices and execute trades nearly instantaneously.  so, let's quickly go through how things came about to this stage  with a little bit of wall street history.  way, way back in the mid 1600s,  there used to be simple fences they used to denote plots and  residences in the new amsterdam settlement in what is now known as lower manhattan.  this particular location on the island was extremely critical,  as it allowed easy access to both the hudson and the east rivers.  so to protect the settlement way back in 1963,  the dutch west india company led the construction of a 12-foot.  yeah, a 12-foot high wall of timber  as a defense against attackers.  in 1685, the city planners laid out  a street running parallel to the timber wall.  and they called it uninspiringly, they call it the walls street,  because there was a 12 feet tall out there.  it became an important street in the late 18th century as a group of traders and  speculators started meeting informally beneath a shady  button wood tree, which is a very common tree in the us on  the wall street to actually trading investments.  there was an agreement, which is now known as the buttonwood agreement,  which took place on may 17th, 1792 and that started the new york stock exchange.  it was actually called the new york stock and exchange board,  now it's called the new york stock exchange.  this agreement was signed by 24 stockholders outside of  68 wall street under buttonwood tree.  by the way, so that's 68 wall street.  by the way, i used to work at 40 wall street,  which is where the old jp morgan office was.  so, coming back to the exchanges.  originally, there were five securities traded in the new york city.  the first listed company on the nyc was the bank of new york, which,  by the way, still exists today.  in 1889, something important happened.  a customer's afternoon letter,  a newspaper that was the first to list stocks and  other afternoon prices changed its name to  the wall street journal for obvious reasons.  so, let me talk a little bit about the other stock exchanges also.  so, in addition to the new york stock exchange,  there is also the american stock exchange called the amex and the nasdaq.  in the past, the nasdaq was for smaller companies that were just getting  started and it was prestigious to move to the nyse or the the amex.  these smaller companies including a few, which are now household names and  you might have heard of them like apple computers, intel and  microsoft in the past decade.  that sets us off with nasdaq and  the linking of these exchanges where computers.  these days, firms don't bother switching from one exchange to  other like they used to before.  so, how does stock trading work?  the way it works is that when you place an order with your stock broker or  your stock broker sends your request to  one of the stock exchanges to see what the best price is.  the price that buyers are willing to pay is called the bid price and  the price that sellers are wanting to sell at for is called the ask price.  so if you're willing to accept the prices currently being quoted,  your broker will send a market price order.  meaning, your order will get filled at the best price available when  your order hits the exchange.  if you're buying stock,  your order will get filled at the price sellers that are asking.  and if you're selling,  your orders will get filled at the price that buyers are bidding.  the system is extremely efficient and the difference between the bid and  the asked prices known as the bid-ask spread is usually very tight,  a few for most stocks.  seeing the brakes prices on the american exchanges or for  that matter in most exchanges are not free, you generally have to pay for  the data and that is one of the ways the exchangers make money.  even when powered by millions of digital real-time  bidders transaction, the stock exchanges themselves  still function pretty much as they used to centuries back.  to a casual observer, it might seem like a very chaotic morass with people in,  especially colored jackets running around shouting.  making coded hand signals, clutching hand full of papers and  bidding buy and sell orders.  so if this was any other business, you would naturally assume bankruptcy or  tornado or a tsunami was at the front door.  yet, when you talk to any trader on the floor of and exchange and  they'll tell you that it all works really well.  so why it appears to be a total [inaudible].  the system actually has worked seamlessly for many years and  continues to be extremely effective today.  [music] 
learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you will be able to explain and  define the characteristics of the government bonds.  you will also be able to read the bond quotes from a financial newspaper like  the wall street journal or the financial times.  government bonds or treasury securities are government debt instruments  that are issued by the government, typically the department of treasury,  to finance a national debt of the particular government.  treasury securities are often referred to simply as treasuries.  as i mentioned before professional bond traders just  use one word depending on the issue of the bond.  so if it's issued by the department of treasury, i would just call them  treasuries, so there are four types of marketable treasury securities.  they are treasury bill, you have treasury notes, we have treasury bonds,  and on other classes securities what are called that tips or  treasury inflation protective securities.  treasury bills are sometimes just called t-bills,  mature in one year or less, so they have a lifetime of one year or less.  now they do not pay any interest prior to maturity, instead they  are sold at a discount of the par value to create a positive year to maturity.  typically, weekly t-bills are commonly issued with  maturity dates of 28 days, which is 4 weeks, or about a month.  they are also issued for 91 days.  that's 31 weeks, 31 times 7, that's 91 days which is about 3 months.  they shoot for 182 days,that's 26 weeks, about 6 months.  and 364 days, that's 52 weeks which is about a year.  and now you can get the latest rates in the markets page of  the financial newspaper such as the wall street journal.  for instance, on the 7th of january,  2016, the t-bill for 28 days or  4 weeks was at 0.2%.  let me show you where on the financial newspaper,  you can actually see the t-bill rates.  it's typically, you get them in the financial times or  the wall street journal,  you typically get them at the bottom of the market data page.  and you can actually see that for  the 7th of jan., 2016,  the four-week t-bill rate was 0.2%.  for the 13-week of t-bill which is basically 91 days,  the rate was 0.215% and for the 26 weeks, it was 0.50% so  that's with 180 days t-bills for 180 days was 0.5%.  you have a second class of government debt which are called as treasury notes or  t-notes.  now the t-notes typically mature in 2 to 10 years.  they have a coupon payment unlike t-bills which have no coupons.  our treasury notes have coupon payments which you can receive every six months and  have a denomination of a thousand dollars.  so in the basic transaction, you can actually buy a t-note  of $1,000 face value for let's say $950, and  you can collect interest of let's say, 3% per year over ten years.  so effectively, you get $30 every year, or 3% of $1,000, $30 every year.  and over the 10 year horizon,  you basically receive about $300 of cash flows.  and initially you typically invest the price.  whatever is the price, let's say the price is 95, so it's $0.95 to $1.  you're basically putting in $950 for a t-note off a face value of $1,000.  now treasury notes and t-bonds, are treasury notes and treasury bonds,  are quoted in the secondary market as a percentage off par,  and in what i call less 30 seconds of a point, or 1 by 32nd, 32 of a point.  so for example, a quote of say 95 07, which means 95 and  7 by 32, the price would basically be, for  the face value of 1,000, it's going to be 952.22,  which is 95 + 7 by 32 for a face value of a $1,000 bond.  now, there are several different notations,  which may be used for bond price quotes.  you could have, notations which include a plus,  which basically indicates one-sixty-fourth of a point.  so examples, in, for instance, if the price is quoted as 95 07+,  essentially that means, the price is 95 + 7 by 32nd plus 1 by 64.  the plus basically indicates 1 by 64th of a dollar.  so, the ten year treasury note has now become  the security that is most frequently quartered when anybody  discusses the performance of the bond markets, and  it's used to convey the market stake on the long term macroeconomic expectations.  so treasury bonds are the sometimes also called as t- bonds or  even they're sometimes they're even called long bonds,  they have the longest maturity from 20 years to 30 years.  now, they have a coupon payment every six months like the t-notes.  and are currently issued with a maturity of 30 years.  the fourth class of security.  you have t-bills, you have t-notes, and you have t-bonds.  the fourth class is what i call tips, or treasury inflation protected securities.  and these are inflation indexed bonds issued by the u.s. treasury.  the principle is adjusted to the consumer price index or  the cpi which is the most commonly used to measure inflation.  so when cpi rises, the principle adjusts upwards.  if the index falls the cpi index falls.  then the principle adjusts downwards.  the coupon is a constant, but  the cash flows that you get are different because the amount of interest  that you get is multiplied by the inflation adjusted principle.  therefore, protecting the holder of the official  inflation rate as asserted by the cpi.  so our tips are not too old.  they've been issued less than 20 years back.  in fact, they were issued and introduced in 1997.  they're currently offered in the form of 5 year, in 10 years, in 30 years securities.  so those are the maturities in which tips are issued.  you also have a fifth class of  securities which are not issued by the government, but these are called strips,  or separate trading of registered interest and principle securities.  so they are basically t-notes, t-bills, or tips whose interests and  principle portions of the securities have been separated or stripped.  and they may then be sold separately  in terms of face value of $100 in the secondary market.  so the name derives form the days before you had it and  securities were in form, when paper bonds were physically traded, and traders would  literally tear off the interest coupon of the paper security for separate resale.  now, as i said before, the government does not directly issue strips.  they're formed typically by investment banks or brokerage firms but  the government does register strips and  keeps an entry of who holds what kind of strips.  now they cannot be bought directly through the treasury's website so you can actually  buy t-bills, t-bonds through the treasury website called, treasury direct.  so you can buy tips, or t-bonds, t-bills,  all of that on the internet at the treasury's website called,  treasury direct, but strips are not available at treasury direct because  the treasury does not issue them, they are only available through a broker.  so essentially the more important,  the government born market essentially comprises of four instruments and then  you know an instrument that's actually derived from these four instruments.  you have t-bills, t-notes, t-bonds, and tips ,and then you have what are called  are strips which are basically just interest payments or  principle payments of any of these four class of government securities. 
[music]  learning outcomes, after watching this video you will be able to explain and  understand the housing starts report.  you will also be able to predict the movements of the stock markets,  bond markets, and currency markets in response to the housing starts data.  housing starts, if you're looking for a single infallible indicator  that can help you foresee the future direction of markets, well, forget it, no.  you won't find any.  [laugh] however, one comes surprisingly close, housing.  the fact that the general economy cannot function with any vitality without  the participation of residential real estate is why many market experts view  home building as one of the most reliable leading indicators of economic activity.  real estate is among the first sectors to shut down when economy nears recession,  and typically, the first to bloom when economy starts to turn around.  what keeps housing so far ahead of the rest of the economy,  mainly it's sensitivity to interest rates.  and over here to the economy drives interest rates higher.  as mortgage rates climb up, this depresses demand for homes and  discourages future construction.  builders are also less likely to seek construction loans when rates are higher.  conversely, when market rates tumble and home prices decline,  events that typically happen during periods of economic weakness,  interest in home buying is renewed now that it is more affordable.  builders in turn thrash back to banks before the cost of borrowing rises again.  another critical aspect of home building industries is how powerful an influence it  has on the rest of the economy through what is known as the multiplier effect.  by multiplier effects, i mean that changes in the pace of housing construction  can have major ramifications for many other industries.  just look at who benefits when housing is strong.  a jump in residential construction drives up demand for steel, for wood,  electricity, glass, plastic wiring, piping, concrete, you name it.  there's also the need for skilled construction workers, such as  brick layers, carpenters, electricians, and on their demand source as well.  while the home construction business typically accounts for  less than 5% of gdp in most economies, its overall impact because  of the multiplier effect on the economy is really much, much greater than that.  a vibrant home selling market also accelerates purchases of furniture,  carpets, home electronics, appliances, all the activities, which together,  can account for nearly one-fifth of gdp, a very significant portion of the gdp.  housing, therefore, is a major string industry in the economy  because it can affect so many types of business.  how does housing data affect the stock markets?  prolonged weaknesses in housing stocks can alarm stock investors  since it's often is a precursor to a broader downturn in the economy.  on the other hand, if housing activity is vibrant and  inflation remains contained, shareholders will view it as a positive sign.  a rebound in housing can have a beneficial impact on other industries as well.  there's a bullish for corporate profits, and therefore, for stock prices.  the danger comes when housing starts surge at a time  when the rest of the economy is already operating at full speed.  investors might withdraw from stocks as worries mount that the central bank will  raise short term interest rates to curb economic activity.  that might increase corporate borrowing rates, and  therefore, has a negative influence on stock markets.  bonds, [cough] so what effect does housing starts have on bonds?  good news in housing is often perceived as bad news for  players in the fixed income markets.  a healthy pick up in housing starts depicts an economy that's robust and  where inflation pressures are likely to accelerate.  that can knock down bond prices and  cause years to rise, leading to losses on bond portfolios.  traders prefer weak or falling housing stocks because the important slackening  economy with less inflation factors that left bond prices.  what effect does housing have on currency?  foreign investors are attracted to domestic currency if they  earn a higher rate of return relative to what they can receive in other countries.  therefore, a strong housing report is considered bullish for  the domestic currency because it usually supports a scenario  of higher corporate profits and firming up of domestic interest rates.  the currency's value can slip with weak housing data because it signals  slow economy growth in future, and thus, falling interest rates.  and in such circumstances, foreigners might choose to seek out more lucrative  investment opportunities in other economies.  [music] 
[music]  learning goals.  after watching this video, you will be able to explain one of the most important  economic indicators, the job report, or the employment situation.  you will also be able to predict the movements in stock markets,  bond markets and currency markets in response to the job market report.  in layman situation,  a job report is one of the most eagerly awaited news on the economy.  why is that so?  because we get to know are jobs being created.  what's the latest unemployment rate like?  that is of tremendous economic significance.  perhaps no other economic indicator can stand stock markets and  bond markets as much as the jobs report.  it really is the big one, why?  because wages and salaries from jobs make up the main source of household income.  the more people like you and me earn, the more we buy and  therefore boost the economy going forward.  if lesser people are working,  if lesser jobs are being created, then spending drops off and businesses suffer.  household spending accounts for a large portion of the economy's total output.  for instance, in the us it accounts for more than two-thirds of the us economy.  so you can see why the investment community pays such close attention  to the jobs report.  there's one more reason why it holds such a sway on financial markets and investors.  that's because the jobs numbers often contain surprises.  the best of experts have difficulty predicting the unemployment figures.  what effect does the jobs report have on the stock markets, on the bond markets,  and on the currency markets?  as far as stocks are concerned, news of robust job creation can make  equity investors hugely bullish about the economy in general and  equity markets in particular.  when people have jobs, they're spending more and  when they don't have jobs, they're perhaps spending lesser.  like if you're a working professional  you probably spend much less as a student then your perhaps doing now.  so as the number of people holding jobs increases, these working  professionals over the weekend slip into the role of the consumers and spend money.  they go out, they're shopping, so basically what this does is that  expectations that businesses stays in profit and pick up in the future increase.  so people to expect businesses to have greater sales and greater profits.  that sets the stage for a rally in equity markets going forward.  how much will the equity markets rise?  that depends on the business cycle.  in general, robust job creation means good news for equity markets.  little or no employment is generally seen as bad for stocks and equity markets.  the worry is that households will be less inclined to shop.  if you don't have jobs you probably will be spending much lesser and  therefore the economy integrates at first.  weak sales can shrink corporate income and  profits and therefore reduce the incentive to own shares.  what effect does it have on bonds?  creditors get quite agitated when there's a strong jobs report,  especially if it's unexpected.  the news can warn off accelerating inflation,  rising interest rates, both of which are a blow to bond holders.  if i'm holding a bond and if inflation increases or  interest rate increases that's bad for me.  so you should be prepared for  a sell off in fixed income securities when job creation is surging.  now how far will bond prices fall and how much will yields rise?  that depends on many factors.  but the most important is where the economy happens to be  in the business cycle.  so if the economy is just, it's just managed to climb out of a transition,  a jump in employment will likely have a very modest effect on bond prices.  because there's no immediate danger of inflation, the economy is  just coming out of recession and it's not going to affect bond markets too much.  however, if employment accelerates,  if the economy is already operating at or near peak capacity, be prepared  to see a steep drop in bond prices and sharply higher interest rates.  in contrast, a series of weak employment reports  reflects a sluggish economy, which is bullish for bond prices, and  means interest rates are actually heading lower which means prices are increasing.  therefore you will be bullish on the bond markets.  what effect does it have on currency?  employment news can greatly influence a domestic currency's value.  a vigorous job support,  a very good job support could drive interest rates higher and rally stocks.  which makes the domestic currency more attractive to foreign investors.  so if i'm a foreign investor, one thing to invest in the local economy and  the job support is good, then i would typically go out there and invest more.  they earn more in terms of equity returns and also in general returns increase.  on the other hand, an anemic jobs report softens demand for  domestic currency because it spells trouble for  the economy which would make the currency less appealing to foreigners.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video you'll be able to understand the size of the fx market,  how it functions, and be able to compare fx markets related to other markets such  as equity and fixed income markets.  you'll be able to understand what liquidity means and  how it affects currency markets.  >> foreign exchange market, more often than not called the forex market,  or simply the fx market is the most traded financial market in the world.  we like to think of the forex market as the big boss of financial markets.  the forex market is the crossroads for international capital, the intersection  through which global commercial and investment flows have to move.  international trade flows such as, let's say, a swiss electronic company  purchases japanese made equipment were the original basis for  the development of the forex markets.  today however, global financial and investment flows dominate trade  as the primary non-speculative source of forex market volume.  whether it's an australian pension fund investing in us treasury bonds or  a british insurer allocating assets to the japanese equity markets.  or a german conglomerate purchasing a canadian manufacturing facility.  each cross border transaction passes through the forex market at some  stage or the other.  more than anything else, the forex market is a trader's market.  it's a market that's open round the clock,  six days a week, enabling traders to act on news and events as they happen.  it's a market where a half a billion dollar trade can be  executed in a matter of seconds.  and may not even move markets or prices noticeably.  try having to buy or sell half a billion of anything in any other market and  see how prices react.  average daily currency trading volume is actually more than $2 trillion per day.  that's a mind boggling number.  that's 2 followed by 12 zeros.  and that's a lot of zeros, no matter how you slice it.  to give you some perspective on that size, it's about 10 to 15 times the size of  daily trading volume on all the world's stock markets combined, all put together.  while commercial and  financial transactions in the currency market represents huge nominal sums,  they still pale in comparison to amounts based on speculation.  by far, the vast majority of currency trading volume is based on speculation.  traders buying and selling for short turn gains based on minute to minute,  hour to hour, and day to day price fluctuations.  estimates are that more than 90% of daily trading volume is derived from  speculation.  meaning commercial or investment based effects trades account for  less than 10% of daily global volume.  the depth and breadth of the speculative market means that the liquidity of  the overall forex market is unparalleled among global financial markets.  the bulk of spot currency trading,  about 75% of volume takes place in the so-called major currencies,  which represents the world's largest and most developed economies.  additionally, activity in the forex market frequently functions on a regional  currency block basis where the bulk of trades take place between the us block,  yen block, and the euro block,  representing the three largest global economic regions.  liquidity refers to the level of market interest, the level of buying and  selling volume available at any given moment for a particular asset or security.  the higher the liquidity or the deeper the market, the faster and  easier it is to buy or sell a security.  from a trading perspective, liquidity is critical concentration  which determines how quickly prices move during trades and over time.  a highly liquid market like forex market can see large trading volumes  transacted with relatively minor price changes.  on the other hand, an illiquid or thin market tends to  move prices more rapidly on relatively lower trading volumes.  a market that only trades during certain hours represents a very, very,  very less liquid or a very thin market.  but as i said before, fx market is really the big boss of financial markets.  and the kind of volumes that you get to see more than $2 trillion in a day is  something that you don't get to see in all stock markets combined,  put together, or in bond markets, or in commodity markets.  it's really the big daddy of financial markets.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes. after watching the video, you will get  an understanding of the various pairs of currencies that are traded.  you will know the mechanics of currency trading and  you will also become conversant with the currency trading terms.  >> the currency market has its own set of market trading conventions and  related lingo, just like any financial market.  if you're new to currency trading, the mechanics and  terminology may take some getting used to.  but at the end of the day,  most currency trade conventions are pretty straightforward, as you will shortly see.  the biggest mental hurdle facing newcomers to currencies,  especially traders familiar with other markets, is getting their head around  the idea that each currency trade consists of a simultaneous purchase and sale.  in the stock market, for instance, if you buying,  say, 100 shares of google, you own 100 shares, and hope to see the price go up.  when you want to exit that trade,  you simply sell what you bought earlier.  however, in currencies,  the purchase of one currency involves the simultaneous sale of another currency.  this is the exchange in the foreign exchange that we're talking about.  to put it another way, if you're looking for the dollar to go higher,  the question is obviously, higher against what?  the answer is, higher against another currency.  in relative terms, if the dollar goes up against some other currency,  that other currency also has gone down against the dollar.  to think of it in stock market terms, or  think of it as a barter trade, when you buy a stock,  you're actually selling cash and when you sell a stock, you're actually buying cash.  currencies, in foreign exchange markets, come in pairs.  to make matters easier,  forex markets refer to currency trading by pairs with names that  combine the two different currencies being traded or exchanged against each other.  additionally, foreign exchange markets have given most currency pairs nicknames  or abbreviations which reference the pair and  not necessarily that currencies that are in work.  for instance, usd gdp, where if you're buying  in british pounds and you're sending dollars,  it's essentially called the cable.  similarly you have, if you are basically buying aussie and selling dollar or  you're selling aussie dollar and buying u.s. dollar, it's called the aussie.  again, let's say you are actually selling kiwi dollar,  new zealand dollar and buying u.s. dollars or vice versa,  you basically say that, that currency pair is basically called kiwi and so on.  the major currency pairs all involve the u.s. dollar on one side of the deal.  the designation of the major currencies are expressed using what is called  the international standardization organization's code for each currency.  all of the vast majority of currency trading takes place in the dollar pairs,  cross currency pairs serve as an alternative to trading in the u.s. dollar.  a cross currency pair or cross, or sometimes called crosses for  short, is any currency pair that does not are include the u.s. dollar.  cross rates are derived from the respective u.s.  dollar pairs but are quoted independently.  crosses enable traders to more directly target trades to specific individual  currencies in this case to take advantage of news or events.  for example, your analysis may suggest that the japanese yen has the worst  prospect of all major currencies going forward based on interest rates or  economic outlook.  to take advantage of this, you may be looking to sell japanese yen but  against which other currency?  you may consider u.s. dollar potentially, so you may want to buy u.s. dollar in  usd jpy, which essentially means buying u.s. dollar and selling japanese yen.  but then you conclude that the u.s.  dollar's prospects are not much better than that of jpy's.  you look for the research on that and actually,  it we point out another currency that has a much better economic outlook or  suggests it could have high or rising.  it may have a very good outlook for the currency  because of rising interest rates or signs of strengthening of the economy.  the economy would be doing well and therefore,  the currency will be appreciating.  say, that's the u.s. dollar.  in that case, you would then be looking to buy the aussie/yen cross,  which is basically buying aussie dollars, selling jpy to target your view that  aussie dollar has the best prospects among major currencies and the yen the worst.  the most actively traded crosses focus on the three  major non u.s. dollar currencies, namely the euro, yen and gbp, or  the sterling, in an effort to as euro crosses, yen crosses and sterling crosses.  now let's understand some of the terminology like the base currency and  the counter currency, which is how the foreign exchange markets are benchmarked.  when you look at currency pairs,  you may notice that the currencies are combined in a seemingly strange order.  for instance, if it's sterling, yen, gbp and  jby, it's a yen cross, then why isn't it actually referred to as yen/sterling and  rather referred to as sterling/yen, and not written as jby and gbp?  the answer is that these coding conventions have evolved over the years  to reflect traditionally strong currencies versus traditionally weak currencies,  with the strong currency coming first.  it also reflects the market coding convention where the first  currency in the pair is known as the base currency or sometimes called as the asset.  the base currency is what you are buying or selling when you buy or sell the asset.  it's also the notional or the face value, the face amount of the trade.  if you are buying say 100,000 euro/yen,  you just bought a 100,00 euros and sold the equal in amount of japanese yen.  if you sell 100,000 gbp/chf,  you just sold 100,000 british pounds and bought the equal amount of swiss francs.  the second currency in the pair is called the counter currency or  sometimes called the secondary currency or sometimes even called as the numeraire.  most importantly, the counter currency is the denomination  of the price fluctuations and ultimately, what your p&l,  profit and losses will be denominated in that currency.  if you buy gbp/jpy, it goes up and  you take a profit, your gains are not going to be in pounds but in yen.  foreign exchange markets use the same terms to express market positioning  as most other financial markets.  but because currency trading involves simultaneous buying and  selling, being clear on the terms helps,  especially if you're new to foreign exchange markets.  there's other terminologies like going long, short, and so on.  going long.  no, we're not talking about going long,  that's not necessarily talking about running out deep for a football pass.  a long position, or  simply a long, refers to a market position that you borrow a security.  in effect, it reflects to having bought a currency pair.  when you're long, you're looking for prices to move higher so  you can sell at a higher price than where you bought.  when you want to close a long position, you have to sell what you bought.  if you're buying at multiple price levels, you're adding to longs and getting longer.  getting short.  a short position, or simply a short, refers to a market position in which  you've sold a security that you never owned.  in the stock market, for instance,  selling a stock short requires borrowing the stock so that you can sell it.  in foreign markets, it means you sold a currency pair, meaning you've  sold the base currency and bought the counter currency or the numeraire.  you're still making an exchange, just in the opposite order and  according to the currency pair recording terms.  when you sold a currency pair, it's called going short or getting short and  it means youre looking for the pair's price to move lower,  so you can buy back at a profit.  if you sell at various price levels, you're adding to shorts and  getting shorter.  in currency trading, going short is as common as going long, selling high and  buying low is a standard currency trading strategy.  currency pair rates reflect relative values between two currencies and  not an absolute price of a single stock or commodity.  because currencies can fall or rise related to each other, both in medium and  long-term trends and minute to minute fluctuations,  currency pair prices are as likely to be going down at any moment as they are up.  to take advantage of such moves, forex traders routinely use short positions to  exploit falling currency prices.  traders from other markets may feel uncomfortable with short selling but  it's just something you have to get your head around.  one of the terms that's fairly commonly used is the system called squaring up.  having no position in the market is actually called being square or flat.  if you have an open position and you want to close it, it's called squaring up.  if you're short, you need to buy to square up.  if you're long, you need to sell to go flat.  the only time you have no market exposure or  financial risk is when you are square or when you are flat.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes, after watching this video, you will know  the different types of orders that you can execute in the stock market.  there are several different types of orders you can use when you place a trade.  a few of the most popular and  the ones that you should be familiar with, i'll discuss them briefly.  market orders.  that's simplest variety, a market order is essentially an instruction to your broker  to execute a buy or a sell immediately at market prices.  the market prices could be whatever but you're instructing your broker to buy or  sell.  depending on which hat you're wearing, either of a buyer or a seller,  as long as there are other willing buyers or sellers of the stock you want to  acquire or dispose of, your order should be quickly carried out, or would be.  more of them are quickly carried out.  your buys will always be executed at the best ask price, and  your sells will be executed at the best bid price.  the second kind of orders are limit orders.  when you place a limit order,  you're essentially asking your broker to buy a stock at no more than or  sell a stock at no less than a specified price that you set.  for example, suppose you decide that you want to buy shares of southwest airlines,  the ticker of which is luv.  at a price of let's say $44.25 when it's currently trading at like say $44.45,  though you would place a limit buy order for  $44.25 which should get filled  if the price drops down to $44.25 or if the price drops lower.  once you buy the shares, you might want to place a limit sell at say, $45.  which should fill if the price gets to $45 or higher.  the third category is stop orders.  when you place a stop order you are asking to buy a stock or  once a certain price point is reached.  or to sell a stock once a lower stock price has been reached.  for example, suppose you bought your southwest airlines stock at say, $44.25,  and placing a limit sell order at $45.00, you place a stop sell order at say $43.75.  this order, also known as the stop loss order,  would sell your southwest shares if the stock price dropped to $43.75.  now these orders are used essentially to limit your losses.  >> a stop buy order would be used if southwest shares was trading at $44.25 and  lets say a range from $44.25 to say $44.50 and  you only wanted to buy if the stock price.  when it spikes up to $44.60.  investors use stop buy orders so that they can buy  a stock only when it breaks out of a narrow trading range.  you also have what are called as day orders.  or good til cancelled or fill or kill.  so placing an order doesn't necessarily mean that  it gets executed instantaneously.  you might be placing trades at night when the markets are closed or  you might be travelling and may not have access to up to the minute or  up to the second stock price information or  you might be following a strict strategy that has very clear and exit prices.  so therefore both the timing and  duration of the orders are important to successfully managing you portfolio.  when placing your market limit or  stop orders there are some duration options that you can specify.  the first one is what is called as a day order.  a day order is good for one day only.  should your broker be unable to execute your order by the close of business  hours that day, your order is automatically cancelled.  and very rarely, should your broker execute your order in error  on the next day, the next business day, then you're not obligated to honor it.  so, should you forget to specify a duration when you place your order,  brokers will typically assume that you issued the order.  the second kind is essentially what is called as good till cancelled or gtc.  a gtc order indicates that your instruction to your broker are open ended.  it stays on and stays in effect.  until it is executed or you cancel it.  to avoid too lengthy or over lengthy gtc durations which may become  counterproductive, many brokers set an upper time limit of  say a pretty large time limit of 60 days or 90 days or 120 days.  that's the upper time limit for execution.  the third kind is fill or kill.  that's less common than other two.  fill or kill is a limit order that you want executed immediately if possible.  if your order can not be filled it's immediately killed,  which means it's cancelled.  new orders typically cancel prior orders for the same stock.  for example let's say you issue a stop order with a day order duration to  your broker and then you rethink your decision and change the duration to gcd.  your day order is canceled and replaced with a new gdc order.  you also want to understand what buying on margins, so  when you open a brokerage account.  you'll be asked if you want to open a margin account.  buying on margin essentially means that you purchase securities using some of your  own cash and you take a loan from your broker to complete the purchase.  the collateral for the loan is the stocks or the cash that you already own.  the difference between the value of the collateral,  which is a securities, and the loan is called the net value.  so margin buying is extremely convenient and cost effective.  but you should always maintain control to avoid financial problems in the future.  that's because you can normally borrow up to 50% of the value of  the securities you're buying within minimum margin requirements.  so should your account or  collateral fall below the minimum required you will be issued a margin call,  which means you will be required to add funds to your account or be forced to  sell off your securities at their current market value, whether you want it or not.  so you should try to keep your account with its appropriate  minimum margin requirements at all times.  margin calls can be costly,  as they can force you to sell stocks at low prices there by locking in loses.  the good news is that you can maximize your buying ability by using  less cash to purchase more shares.  for example in aggressive broker that allows you a 0.25 less average ability  gives you the power to use only $2,000 to buy up to $800,000 worth of stock.  the bad news, because you maximized your buying power,  should your stocks fall in value, your losses are also maximized.  so again, should your account fall below the margin,  the minimum requirement you will have to come up with more cash.  so, you know techniques that i used for training.  it also helps you to maintain  the in your training strategy.  [music] 
[music]  well, we are at the end of the course and you've reached this far,  if you've reached this far, you should give yourself a pat on the back.  we've covered a very wide range of topics on the essentials of financial markets.  so, why did we cover as wide a range of topics as we did?  now you might ask, was it really essential or necessary?  would it have been shorter?  to answer the question, let me give you an analogy.  you would probably agree with me that no one in his right mind would walk into  the cockpit of an airplane and try to fly it, or  walk into an operating table and open up a belly.  yet most people think nothing of investing in financial markets.  our friends who have done all three and they tell me that, managing money or  investing management is one of most critical elements  is even more demanding than the other two that are cited.  so the course covered the range of topics that i thought or  i think are essential to start to make an entry into the financial markets.  the journey has only begin, and it may take a lifetime to master it.  yet it's a very good.  it also probably helps to understand and  appreciate what we did not cover and also the reasons for that.  this course is not about how to predict financial markets.  as the sixth century chinese poet lao tzu said,  those who have knowledge don't predict, those who predict don't have knowledge.  that's because anything can happen in markets.  now what lao said was extremely, extremely true international markets.  no adviser, no economist, no tv commentator, and  definitely not i can tell you when chaos will occur.  market forecasters will fill your back will now fill you wallet.  it's often said that there are two kinds of forecasts.  two kinds of forecasts.  lucky or wrong.  and we'll see fair risk scan is to pretend that luck is skill.  i'll tell you a story, very famously jp morgan,  the legendary banker, financier and businessman.  when he was asked what the stock markets will do he replied to fluctuate.  now we were not so profound in the course, nor were we like the quant guy who  puts a forecast up to the decimal point to show that he has a sense of humor.  so by now you kind of figured out that you don't need those third decimal forecasts  and you probably.  we also know that you don't need to be a rocket scientist to be a very  good investor.  thankfully, investing is not a game where the guy  with a 160 iq thumps the guy with the 130 iq.  more often than not, it's actually the other way around.  so investing is actually about having a good plan and  more importantly, executing it.  so, before we wind up, i'll have a word of caution.  this course was about investment management and  not about speculation management.  okay.  speculation is an effort which, you know, probably you know,  is an activity, probably answers for return a small amount of money into a lot.  success in speculation is like, it's, speculating in the market is like,  you know, watching a drunk man walk a tight rope.  you never know what's going to happen next.  but there's something in people who you might even call it a little bit  of a gambling instinct, which propels them towards speculation.  please don't do that, okay?  at least not at the beginning.  on the other hand, investment is an effort that,  should it be successful, will increase your wealth slowly but surely.  i tell people that, people who ask me about advice for investing,  i tell them that investing should be like, should be dull.  it shouldn't be exciting.  investing should be more like watching paint dry or  watching grass grow, as simple as that.  it should be really boring.  if you want excitement,  if you want to speculate, take a thousand dollars and go to las vegas.  okay, speculation to me is like crap shooting in las vegas,  except that in that [inaudible] the odds are with the house.  as for investing the odds are with you, because on average on  the long run if you just look at data [inaudible] have paid off.  so hopefully this course has given you a very good introduction to financial  markets and has made you think about how  you can profit from the arts that are with you.  financial markets have created wealth in the long run.  one final word before i let you go.  long back when i joined wall street i was told by a very senior banker,  he taught me that price is what you pay value is what you get after  having spent a lot of time in financial markets,  today i am buying stocks or  i'm buying socks, i like to buy quality merchandise.  and i i like to buy quality merchandise where it is marked down.  so as i mentioned before if you are good at mentioning this, you know,  in, a lot of lectures where you are good at buying quality merchandise  when it is marked down.  you would do well in the wall street, and  also in walmart street, or the main street.  thank you, thank you very much.  [music] 
learning outcomes.  after watching this video,  you'll be able to describe the various features of agency bonds.  you will also be able to understand and explain the advantages and  disadvantages of agency bonds.  in the world of bonds, agency bonds represent one of the safest investments,  and are often compared to treasury bonds or government securities.  because of their low risk and very high liquidity.  now, unlike government bonds, which are issued only by the government,  agency bonds come from several sources.  including not just government agencies but  also certain corporations that have been granted a charter by the government.  the best known agency bonds are sold by the government national  mortgage association, commonly called as ginnie mae.  the federal national mortgage association commonly called as fannie mae,  and the federal home loan mortgage cooperation,  commonly known as freddie mac.  the key difference between say a ginnie mae and fannie mae and  freddie mac is that the fannie mae and the freddie macs  are government sponsored enterprises, called as gses.  but only ginnie mae securities are explicitly  backed by the full faith and credit of the us government.  not all agency bonds are issued by government agencies,  though they are called agencies.  in fact the largest issuers are not agencies per se, but  rather government sponsored entities or gses.  now there is an important distinction because true  agencies are explicitly backed by the full faith and credit of the us government.  making their risk of default virtually negligible or  as low as the government bonds or government debt.  so while gses or government sponsored enterprises are private corporations that  hold government charter which has been granted, and it's been  granted because of their activities have been deemed important for public policy.  now among other things, corporations provide these government sponsored  enterprises, provide home loans, farm loans, student loans.  they help finance international trade.  and because the government typically would place special  emphasis on these activities by the gses, it grants charter.  and the bond market believes that the government would not  allow charter holding enterprises, firms, or gse's to fail.  and therefore they have the implicit guarantee,  the government is essentially providing an implicit guarantee to  the government sponsored enterprises even though they are private corporations.  so although agency bond traders recognize this distinction between true agencies and  gses, for instance ginnie mae and fannie mae, when you're buying or selling bonds,  but yields for both kinds of debt tend to trade virtually identical.  so if you picked up the newspaper and  the newspaper market data page will have the prices and  yields of securities from ginnie mae, fannie mae, freddie mac, and so on.  you would find that the difference between the returns or the yields that you  get from ginnie mae which has explicit guarantee from the us government and  fannie mae which only has an implicit guarantee from the us government.  the spreads are almost negligible.  so now even though you know agencies in general carry government guarantee,  implicit or explicit, agency bonds tend to trade at a premium or  a spread about comparable government bonds or treasury bonds.  now, a couple of reasons why investors expect a higher return on  agency bonds vis-a-vis treasuries.  firstly, now there are some additional risks, however little,  because it's stemming from political risk that  the government guarantee of agency that could be modified or  revoked in the future, leaving the bondholders more susceptible to default.  so it's possible that the guarantees may be revoked in the future  because of change of government, change of economic environment, and so on.  the second reason is that treasury bonds, or a government debt, is arguably  the most liquid financial instrument on the planet and or at least in the market.  and are used by central banks and very large institutions,  financial institutions, requiring the ability to buy or  sell securities in vast quantities very quickly and efficiently.  so they're extremely liquid.  agencies, on the other hand, are not as liquid as government debt.  and they are not as efficient in terms of trading as government debt.  so, now a large portion of, one of the distinction between government debt and  agencies is that a large portion of agency debt is callable.  now, which can be a good thing for you, because if, let's say,  the debt is callable and the agencies have the right to call the security,  they normally would provide a slightly higher return to compensate you for  the risk of the fact that the bond may be called.  now since callable bonds contain this embedded call option,  which is exercisable by the seller, they, as i said, typically carry a higher  yield to compensate you for the risk for holding this bond which can be called.  now, some callable agency bonds are callable any time,  while some are only callable only monthly or quarterly,  or even on some specific dates prior to maturity.  agency bonds give individuals and institutions the opportunity to  get a higher return vis-a-vis compared to treasury bonds  while sacrificing very little in terms of risk or liquidity.  so you, by investing in agencies, you get pretty high returns,  while, as compared to treasuries while taking a very marginal or  incremental risk compared to government debt.  so agencies are a very important class of instruments in the bond markets,  and they are only next to government debt in terms of liquidity and size. 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you'll know the importance of currency markets,  and its relation to other markets in the world.  you'll also know how news and data affect currency markets.  the forex market is open and active 24 hours a day from the start of  business hours on monday morning in the asia pacific timezone straight through  to the friday close of the business hours in new york.  at any given moment, depending on the timezone dozens of financial centers  such as sidney, tokyo, london are open and  currency trading desks in those financial centers are active in the market.  currency trading doesn't even stop for  holidays when other financial markets like stocks or future exchanges may be closed.  even though it's a holiday in japan, for example, sydney, singapore,  and hong kong may still be open.  it might be the 4th of july in the us,  which is independence day of the united states, but if it's a business day, tokyo,  london, toronto and other financial centers might still be trading currencies.  about the only holiday in common around the world is the new year's day and  sometimes christmas, and even that depends on what day of the week it falls on.  as regards the opening of the trading week,  there is no officially designated starting time to the trading day or week.  but for all intents and purposes the market action kicks off  when wellington in new zealand, the first financial center  west of the international date line opens on monday morning local time.  depending on whether daylight saving time is in effect in the timezone,  it roughly corresponds to early sunday afternoon in north america.  and it corresponds to sunday evening in europe, and  very early monday morning in asia.  the sunday open represents the starting point where currency markets  resume trading after the fridayclose of trading in north america,  which happens at 5 pm eastern time in the us.  that's the friday close.  now, sunday, monday morning is the first chance for  the forex market react to news and events that may happen over the weekend.  prices may have closed while in new york on friday, trading at one level.  but depending on the circumstances,  they may start trading at very different levels at the sunday open,  which is basically monday morning in asia, especially in investor in new zealand.  trading in the asia pacific currency region,  as far as trading in the asia pacific region is concerned,  currency trading volumes in the asia pacific session accounts for  a little more than 20% of the total.  daily global volume, the financial,  the principal financial trading centers are wellington in new zealand,  sydney in australia, tokyo in japan, hong kong and and singapore.  in terms of the most actively traded currency pairs,  which means what kind of news and data effect.  basically news and data reports from new zealand, australia, and  japan are going to be hitting the market during this session.  because of the size of the japanese market and  the importance of the japanese data to the market, much of the action  during the asia pacific session is focused on the japanese yen currency pairs,  such as usdjpy, which is essentially forex speak for  us dollar, japanese yen, and the end crosses like euro yen and ozzy yen.  of course, japanese financial institutions are also most active during this session,  so you can quickly get a sense of what the japanese market is doing  based on price movements.  for individual traders overall liquidity in the major currency pairs is more than  sufficient with generally ordinary price movements during this time.  in some less liquid non-regional currencies like gbp usd or  usd canadian dollar a price performance may be more erratic or  nonexistent depending on the enrollment that is prevailing.  as for as trading in the european and  london session is concerned about midway through the asian trading day,  european financial centers begin to open up and the market gets into full swing.  european financial centers and london account for  over half of total daily global trading volume,  with london alone accounting for about one third of total daily global volume.  the european session overlaps with half of the asian trading day and  half of the north american trading session, which means that market  interest and liquidity is at its absolute peak during this session.  news and data events from the eurozones, such as countries like germany and  france, which are part of the eurozone, and even countries like switzerland and  uk are typically released in the early morning hours of the european session.  as a result, some of the biggest moves and most active training takes place  in the european currencies like euro, sterling, and swiss francs, and  the euro cross currency like the euro swissie and euro cable, euro gbp.  asian trading centers begin to wind down in the morning hours of the european  session and north american financial centers come in a few  hours later around 7:00 am, et, eastern time.  our trading in the north american session, as far as that is concerned,  because of the overlap between north american and  european trading sessions, the trading volumes are much more significant.  some of the biggest and most meaningful  directional price movements takes place during this crossover period.  on its own, however, the north american trading sessions accounts for  roughly the same share of global trading as that of asia pacific market,  which is a little more than 20% of global daily, in volume.  the north american morning is when key economic data is released and  the forex market makes many offers most significant positions  on the value of the u.s. dollar during this time.  most u.s. data reports are released at 8:30 am, eastern time,  with others coming out later, between 9:00 am and 10 am, eastern time.  canadian data reports are also released in the morning,  usually between 7:00 am and 9:00am, et.  they're also a few u.s. economic reports that variously come out at noon or  2:00 pm, eastern time, livening up the new york afternoon market.  london and the european financial centers begin to wind down their  trading operations around eastern time, each around noon, eastern time each day.  the london or european close, as it's known,  can generate volatile flurries of activities.  on most days market liquidity and interest falls off significantly  in the new york afternoon, which can make for challenging turning conditions.  on quiet days, the generally lower market interest typically leads to  stagnating price action.  on more active days where prices may have moved more significantly,  the lower liquidity can spark additional outsized price performance,  as fewer trailers scramble to get similarly fuel prices and liquidity.  just as with the london close,  there is never a set way in which new york afternoon market move plays out.  so traders are generally careful and are aware that low liquidity  conditions tend to prevail and adapt accordingly.  so that's how the markets spans out in asia pacific,  in europe, and in us time zone in the forex markets.  [music] 
[music]  learning goals, after watching this video,  you will be able to correctly explain the consumer confidence index data.  you will also be able to predict the movements in stock markets, bond markets,  and currency markets in response to the data on consumer confidence.  consumer confidence index, what is it?  this index examines how consumers like you and me feel about jobs,  about the economy, and about our own spending.  happy consumers as you might guess are good for businesses.  if i'm a happy consumer, i'm more likely to shop,  travel, invest and therefore, keep the economy on a roll.  an unhappy, grouchy consumer, or  even an insecure consumer is lousy for business.  and if the number of whiners is far too large, it can derail economic activity.  so, any sign of failing confidence  can immediately set off alarm bells in the financial markets.  that's because consumer expenditure accounts for  a significant portion of the economy's total demand.  for that reason, economists, policymakers, and very importantly,  traders, carefully track the temperament of households.  it's certainly reasonable to conclude that when you  are uncertain about your future, you are more watchful of the money you spend.  if i'm not so certain,  i'm going to be a little bit more conservative in spending money.  however, if i'm very upbeat about the economic outlook,  it's perhaps logical to think that i'll feel more comfortable spending money.  so consumer confidence index, or cci, as it's sometimes called  is defined as the degree of optimism by people like you and  me on the state of the economy.  and it's something that we are expressing  through our activities of savings and spending.  so the consumer confidence index is actually made of two different indices,  which are then combined to calculate the consumer confidence index.  the first is the present situation's index.  now this reflects consumers' attitudes about current conditions.  the second is the expectations index, which represents how consumers feel  conditions would change in the next six months.  so finally, you add these two indices, and  you have the overall consumer confidence index, which is,  as i said, is based on a composite of these two indices.  so this particular index is calculated  based on a survey because you can't have an instrument like a thermometer or  a pressure gauge to actually measure confidence, okay?  so it's based on a survey.  the survey essentially asks five questions,  three of which are about the expectations.  and two questions are about the current situation.  so the consumer confidence index is weighted wherein your  expectations index comprise 60% of the index, and  the current situation accounts for the remaining 40%.  so, [cough] how is consumer confidence gauged?  okay, as i said, it's based on a simple survey  where consumers like us are asked five key questions.  the first question relates to the present situations index.  it asks, how would you rate the present general business condition in your area?  and you have to answer it in very simple terms.  you're given three options.  is it good, is it normal, or is it bad?  the second question is about the expectations index.  and the question is, six months from now,  do you think the economic conditions will be better,  or will they be the same, or will they be worse?  the third question is, again, about the present situations index.  the third question is,  what would you say about available jobs in your area right now?  are there plenty of jobs, not so many, or is it hard to get?  the fourth and the fifth question is about the expectations index.  so the fourth question is, six months from now do you think there will be more jobs,  the same number of jobs as there are right now, or lesser number of jobs?  and the final question, the fifth question is, what would you guess your total  family income to be six months from now, higher, about the same, or lower?  so based on these five questions,  three of which is used to measure the expectations index and  two of them is used to measure the present situations index,  we calculate the consumer confidence index.  so based on this, essentially you gauge consumer confidence.  what is the impact of consumer confidence on stock markets, on bond markets,  on currency markets?  first the stock markets.  crumbling confidence by consumers is not very favorable to equities,  because it can be a bad omen for declining business sales and fading profits.  shareholders hope that consumer confidence stays high, so  that it encourages more spending, which is of course, bullish for the stock market.  what's the impact on bonds?  a very sharp and sustained rise in consumer confidence is worrisome for  fixed income investors, for bond investors.  that's because a sustained increase in  consumer confidence could lead to an acceleration in borrowing and shopping,  factors that can fuel faster economic growth and therefore stoke inflation.  bond traders prefer to see consumers being less cheerful and  less optimistic about the future if not an outright pessimistic outlook.  so if consumers have an outright pessimistic outlook, that's great news for  bond investors because that will suggest a cutback in spending and  more modest economic activity going forward.  what effect does it have on currency markets?  a depressed consumer makes foreign investors with exposure  in the domestic currency a bit nervous.  now it raises the prospect of falling interest rates and a weakening business  climate, both of which don't bode well for the domestic currencies value.  foreign investors might sell the domestic currency  in search of higher yields and a stronger economy elsewhere.  on the other hand, foreign investors might sell the domestic currency in search for  higher yields and a stronger economy elsewhere.  on the other hand, an upbeat consumer can lift domestic interest rates and  stock market returns to levels that promise a higher return  relative to other regions in the world.  this normally has the effect of increasing demand for the domestic currency.  [music] 
learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you'll be able to explain why bond prices fluctuate.  you'll also be able to understand the concept of yields,  which is used to calculate the returns on bond investments and  how bond prices change with yields and vice versa.  you may wonder why bond prices fluctuate at all since the bond holder has  been promised full repayment at maturity.  so if you're supposed to get a thousand dollars back after some time,  it's still worth a thousand dollars at a future point in time.  so, why should prices fluctuate for that thousand dollars of repayment?  this question that why prices should fluctuate or  do fluctuate can best be answered within the logical text of interstates and  that's the key to understand bonds, and  that is what we will discuss in this particular module.  an interest rate can be regarded, as the purchase price of money.  basically, when there is a lot of demand for money by governments,  by businesses, by consumers and the supply is limited as it normally  happens during economic expansion the cost of money rises, i.e.  interest rates rise.  on the other hand, when demand is slack and  money is freely available as it is normally the case during  an economic slow down or a recession interest rates and to fall.  now there is not one single interest rate, but several of them.  so if you are to look at the newspaper, the wall street journal or  the financial times, you can actually find a lot of interest rates,  different interest rates that are discussed in the newspapers.  and if you want to understand what they mean,  they basically are interest rates, which are for different issuers.  so the different interest rates are the prime rate,  which are interest rates that banks charge their most credit worthy borrowers.  it could be the fed funds rate, which is the interest rate charged on loans  made between banks that are members of the federal reserve system.  it could be the federal reserve discount rate that member banks pay on  bonds borrowed from federal reserve banks or they could be money market rates,  including short-term iou's issued by the government.  these are typically called treasury bills and so on.  there are various different kinds of interest rates.  now although there are differences between the interest rate levels  of various issuers and issues, all rates tend to move together.  so, when you open the newspaper and you find that in comparison from yesterday,  the interest rates have changed, you would normally find that all  the interest rates that you would find in the business page of the newspaper or  the market paper or the financial newspaper, you'll find that all of them  would have either increased together or they will have come down together.  so at any given point in time, interest rates reflect not only the current  market conditions, but also the market expectations of future trades and  interest rates and they tend to go together.  so, all rates tend to move either up or down together.  now, new bonds that are issued at rates dictated by economic conditions and  expectations are issued at the current prevailing interest rates.  as rates change, the returns investors expect from bonds  already trading in the open market must be adjusted to remain  competitive, to make the bonds remain competitive and  make the returns attractive to investors.  now, since the annual interest payments are fixed for a particular bond's life.  so if you're short of ten-year bond, the interest payments for  the next ten years are normally fixed.  the only way in which you can account for the change in the interest  rates is through adjustments made to the price of the bond itself.  so, the aggregate return on the bonds  are essentially are in sync with how the interest rates are changing and  these aggregate returns on bond are nominally called as yields.  so just to recap, prices basically,  the adjustment mechanism that conforms yields to the general  level of interest rates and at the expense of repeating myself.  to repeat even though bond holders receive the full face value at maturity,  a bond supplies will fluctuate during its life for  a very simple reason that if all the other factors are equal and  investor would never buy an existing bond from under the bond holder when  compatible issues being offered elsewhere are priced higher returns.  so for instance, if i have a bond issued last year and  i have a bond issued this year and interest rates have increased,  then unless the price of the bond that was issued last year goes down.  i'm never going to basically buy the bond that pays me a lower interest rate,  because last year, perhaps interest rates were lower and  the bonds were issued at a lower interest rate.  so, bond prices normally change with changing interest rates.  that being said, they do not swing as widely or as rapidly as common stock do,  but we do need to realize that bond prices fluctuate nevertheless.  now as i said, they don't fluctuate as much as stock prices and  that's one of the reasons why you don't find mention of the changes in bond  prices in the headlines of newspapers, but they do change nevertheless.  so if a bond is sold before its maturity date,  it's possible that the bond holder will receive less  than the face value and perhaps substantially less.  so for instance, if you have a bond that was issued last year at  a lower interest rate and interest rates have increased this year,  because the fed has essentially changed interest rates.  and as i mentioned before,  all the interest rates tend to move together collectively.  so if interest rates have actually increased,  because the fed has increased interest rates as a monetary policy tool.  then for the bond that was issued last year,  which is paying the lower coupon for it to be attractive for investors,  the investor should be able to buy the bond at a lower price.  so the price is basically the adjustment mechanism of using which,  you basically make bonds attractive for trading.  [cough] one last point, essentially as prices adjust themselves depending  on how interest rates change, we normally compute the aggregate return that  we basically get on the bond investment and these are called yield to maturity.  so you would normally find that as bond prices decrease,  the aggregate return that you're getting on the bond investment tends to increase.  because as you're investing lower as the bond price goes down,  you're actually investing lower and  you're still getting back the face value of the bond at maturity.  so, the return that you get on the bond is actually substantially  higher than what the coupon payment is and that's a general rule.  if the price of the bond is lower than the face value, you should expect the yield or  the aggregated return on the bond to be higher than the coupon payment.  and if the price of the bond is actually higher than the face value,  you should expect the yield on the bond to be lower than the coupon value. 
[music]  learning outcomes, after watching this video,  you will have a clear understanding of how profit and loss works in currency markets.  you will understand what margin balances are and what liquidation means.  you will also be able to differentiate between unrealized and  realized profit and loss.  profit and loss is how traders measure success and failure in financial markets.  a clear understanding of how p&l works is especially critical to margin trading  where your p&l directly affects the amount of margin you have to work with.  changes in your margin balance determines how much you can trade and  for how long you can trade if prices move against you.  so let's understand margin balances and liquidations.  when you open a currency trading account, which is mostly online these days,  especially for new investors like you and me,  you will need to put cash as collateral to support the margin requirement.  and the margin requirement is established by a broker.  that initial margin deposit becomes your opening margin balance and  is the basis on which all your subsequent trades are collateralized.  like in futures markets or margin based equity trading,  forex brokerages, most of them do not issue margin calls,  which are requests for more collateral to support open positions.  instead they establish ratios of margin balances to open positions  that must be maintained at all times.  so let's take an example to help us understand how required  margin ratios work.  say you have an account with some broker with a leverage ratio of 100 is to 1.  so, $1 of margin in your account can control $100 position size.  when your broker requires 100% margin ratio, meaning,  you need to maintain 100% of the required margins at all times.  the ratio varies from account size, but  100% margin requirement is typical for small accounts.  that means to have a position size of $10,000,  you would need $100 in your account because $10,000 divided  by the leverage ratio of 100, is actually $100.  if your account's margin balance falls below the required ratio, your broker  probably has the right to close out your position without any notice to you.  if your broker liquidates your position, that usually means your losses are locked  in, and your margin balance just got smaller.  it's therefore very important for investors,  retail investors especially like you and  me to understand the broker's margin requirements and liquidation policies.  requirements may differ depending on account size and  whether you're trading say a standard lot size, which is 100,000 currency units,  or mini lot sizes, which are 10,000 currency units.  some brokers' liquidation policies allow for  all positions to be liquidated if you fall below the margin requires.  others close out the biggest losing positions, or  portions of losing positions until the required ratio is satisfied again.  you can find the details in the fine print of the opening  account contract that you signed.  and most brokerages these days put it in really fine print, really small font.  but it's important to always read the fine print to be sure you understand  your broker's margin and trading policies.  also to understand what is called unrealized and realized profit and loss,  so let's understand what is unrealized and realized profit and loss.  most forex brokers provide real time market-to-market calculation showing  your margin balance.  market-to-market is the calculation that shows your unrealized p&l  based on where you could close your open position in the market at that instant.  depending on your broker's trading platform, if you're long,  the calculation will typically be based on where you could sell at that moment.  if you're short, the price used will be where you can buy at that moment.  your margin balance is the sum of your initial margin deposit,  your unrealized p&l, and your realized p&l.  realized p&l is what you get when you close out a trade position or  a portion of a trade position.  if you close out the full position and go flat, whatever you made or  lost leaves the unrealized p&l calculation and then goes into your margin balance.  if you only close a portion of your open positions,  only that part of the trade's p&l is realized and goes into the margin balance.  your unrealized p&l continues to fluctuate based on the remaining  open positions, as does your total margin balance.  if you've got a winning position open, your unrealized p&l is positive, and  your margin balance increases.  if the market is moving against your positions,  your unrealized p&l is negative, and your margin balance is getting reduced.  forex prices change constantly.  so your market to market unrealized p&l and  total margin balance also changes constantly.  and how do you calculate p&l with pips?  profit and loss calculations are pretty straightforward, in terms of math.  and they're all based on position size and the number pips you make or lose.  now what is this thing called as a pip?  a pip is the smallest increment of price fluctuation in currency prices.  pips are also referred to as points,  we will be using the two terms interchangeably.  now let's just look at a few currency pairs to help us get an idea of  what a pip is.  most currency pairs are quoted using five digits.  the placement of the decimal point depends on whether it's a yen currency pair,  in which case there are two digits behind the decimal point.  all of the currency pairs have four digits behind the decimal point.  in all cases, that last itty bitty digit is the pip.  so let's take some major currency pairs and crosses and see what the pip is.  say for instance that euro dollar is at 1.2853,  the last decimal point, 3, is called as the pip.  let's say swizzie usd chf is at 1.2867.  that 7 number is basically the pip.  if, let's say usdjpy is at 117.23,  that 3 is basically the pip in that yen fx rate.  if it's a euro yen and it's at 150.65 the 5 is the pip on the euro yen.  so let's focus on the euro-usd price first.  looking at the euro-usd the price moves from say 1.2853  to 1.2873, it's just gone up 20 pips.  if it goes from 1.2853 down to say 1.2792, it's just gone down by 61 pips.  pips provide an easy way to calculate the p&l.  to turn that pip movement into a p&l calculation,  all you need to do is to basically take the size of the position.  say, for instance, you have 100,000 euro dollar position.  the 20 pip move equates to $200 because it's euros 100,000  times 20 pips, which is 0.0020, and that's $200.  for a 50,000 euro dollar position,  the 61 point move translates into $305 because that's  50,000 euros times 0.0061, that's equal to 305.  whether the amounts are positive or negative,  that depends on whether you were long or short for each move.  if you were short for the move,  for the move higher, that's a minus in front of the $200.  if you were long, it's a plus.  so, let's say you want to calculate that for another currency.  i mean, euro usd, which is what we considered earlier,  that's easy to calculate, especially for us dollar based traders,  because the p&l accrues in dollars.  let's say you're trading dollar chf, swizzie.  okay, and  you've got basically another calculation to make before you can make sense of that.  so that's because the p&l is going to be denominated in swiss francs  because chf is the swiss francs is the counter currency.  if usd-chf drops from 1.2267 to 1.2233,  and you're short us dollars 100,000 for  the move lower, you've just got caught 34 pip decline.  that's a profit worth chf $340, because that's a $100,000 times 34 pips,  which is 0.0034, that's equal to swiss francs 340.  yeah, so it's swiss francs 340, but how much is that in us dollars?  to convert that into us dollars you need to divide  the chf 340 by the us dollar, swiss franc rate.  you typically use, you'd always use the closing rate of the trade which  is 1.2233 because that's where the market was last.  and you would get about us $277.94.  now things have changed, and they'll continue to change in the forex market.  even the venerable pip has now got updated as electronic  trading continues to advance.  half the prices have been the norm in certain currency pairs in  the the bank market for many years.  now, with online markets and catching up,  we basically rapidly advancing to decimalizing pips,  which is basically one-tenth of a pip, we are now trading in one-tenths of pips.  now how do you factor in the profit and loss into the margin calculations?  the good news is that most fx trading platforms calculate the p&l for  you automatically.  both unrealized, while the trade is open and realized when the trade is closed.  so i mean, then why do you need to essentially calculate the, or  do the calculations for p&l using pips?  because brokerages only start calculating your p&l after you enter a trade.  to structure your trade what you need to do is to manage your risks effectively,  which is to understand how big a position do you want,  how much margin to risk, and so on.  and you're going to need to calculate your p&l, the outcomes,  before you actually enter the trade.  so understanding the p&l implications of a trade strategy you're considering  is extremely critical to maintaining your margin balance and  staying in control of your trading.  now the simple p&l calculation can help prevent you from making costly mistakes  like putting on a trade that's too large.  and the minimum you need to calculate the price  point at which your position will be liquidated  when your margin balance falls below the required ratio.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes, at the end of this video you will be able to explain and  understand the economic indicator called retail sales.  you will also be able to predict the response of the stock markets,  bond markets and currency markets to retail sales data.  data and sales and of consumer spending makes a significant portion of  all economic activity in most countries.  if consumers can keep cash registers ringing  it's a sign of overall economic growth and prosperity.  to monitor such expenditures, thousands of retailers each month are surveyed for  their latest sales numbers.  as a result, investors see the retail sales report  as one of the best indicators of change in consumer spending patterns.  an unexpected swing in it's numbers can sway the prices of stocks and bonds.  so how does retail sales numbers affect stock prices, and bond prices and  currency prices?  stocks, participants in the equity  markets closely monitor activity in the consumer sector of the economy.  healthy retail sales increases corporate revenues in profits,  both of which are positive for stock prices if retail sales are paltry,  if retail sales aren't great, it raises questions about what consumers are up to  and whether business earnings can be sustained.  such uncertainties plays downward pressure on stock prices, bonds,  money managers in the fixed income markets get all worked up and nervous.  when shoppers are having too good a time in stores,  a junking retail sales suggests that consumers are in a buying mood.  this could accelerate economic growth,  a scenario that's likely to lower bond prices and lift yields.  a weak or falling retail sales report can set the stage for  bond prices to rise higher.  what's the effect of retail sales on currency?  players in the currency market find a retail sales report  to be a fairly tricky indicator to analyze.  that's because while foreign investors prefer to see domestic consumers in  a shopping mood, because that kind of firms up interest rates,  which is bullish for the currency.  an overall strong retail sales number can also spell trouble for  currency, if the economy largely imports these goods.  like for instance the us does, if imports are much larger than exports,  then a jump in imports also increases demands for other currencies to pay for  all these foreign products.  that are getting imported, and  that can potentially hurt the domestic currency.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video you will understand the kind  of companies that get traded in the stock exchanges.  you will know the difference between a privately held company and  a publicly traded company.  you'll understand the different stages of funding and  you will also know what an initial public offering, ipo means.  now that you know what an exchange is,  it's important to make a distinction between what shares trade on exchanges and  what shares don't, and also why.  most companies are privately owned, and they don't trade on the exchanges.  for instance, the barber shop or the florist on your street corner,  the guy that cuts your grass, or the plumber that fixes your sink.  they're all usually small companies that are owned directly  by the founders or proprietors.  but as the companies grow, they need additional money to expand.  and one way that they can do this is to sell part ownership  of the company to the public.  so when companies are just basically funded by the proprietor,  basically the first source of funding typically tends to be venture capital.  or sometimes even the first source of funding can be an angel investor, and  then venture capital.  typically, angel investors put less than a million dollars.  venture capital typically put in anywhere from $1 to $10 million.  and then the next round of financing happens with a private equity firm where  the private equity firm typically puts anywhere from $10 to $100 million,  even though there are also transactions where private equity firms put  more than $100 million firms.  but if a company is growing a lot and needs a whole lot of money,  then no private equity firm would be willing to put in billions of dollars.  so that's when a company decides to go public and they  enlist an investment banker or a brokerage firm to sell their shares to the public.  you may have heard of the term ipo that stands for initial public offering.  this represents the first opportunity for  the public to purchase shares in a particular company.  so until a company's ipo date, they have been functioning as  a privately held entity, even when a vc was investing in the firm,  or a private equity fund was investing in the firm,  it was still a privately held company.  and one of few people owned all the stock, and  they were not registered or approved by the sec, or the securities and  exchange commission, [cough] as a potential investor.  by the way, the ipo doesn't happen on a whim.  at a bare minimum, it involves the company compiling an impressive track  record in business, displaying good profits and future income threats.  so if you're an investor, you should be aware that you're typically  taking more risk when dealing with an ipo than with other stock purchases.  since the company has never been publicly traded before,  it's not a publicly traded stock.  you have little assurance that their ipo price will stabilize or increase.  sometimes you encounter an ipo which is a lemon.  but you also encounter ipos like facebook, which can be enormously successful.  let's say you acquired, you invested in the facebook ipo, and  your newly acquired stock performs extremely well.  some ipos can actually double, triple or  even quadruple in a very short time period.  take the example of facebook for instance.  on may 18, 2012, facebook held its initial public offering.  at that time, it was the largest technology ipo in the us history.  facebook offered a little more than 420 million shares at a price of $38  per share which, if you do the math,  essentially they raised around $16 billion through that offering.  in three years time after the ipo, shares of facebook closed at about $96.95.  so from $38 it went back,  it went way up to $96.95.  that's a huge return, if you look at the return over the three year time period,  comes to a little more than 150% per year.  so when you buy shares from an ipo you're essentially buying directly from  the company who use the company proceeds from the ipo for the expansion plans.  afterwards, if you want to sell your ipo shares,  you must sell them on the secondary markets like the nyse, amex, or nasdaq.  shares that trade on exchanges are traded between individuals and  other businesses and no more cash goes directly to the company after the ipo.  secondary markets are where the vast majority  of securities transactions take place.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you'll be able to understand what risk and  returns are and what do they mean.  you'll also know how risk can be reduced by diversification.  building a stock portfolio is easy.  but building a successful portfolio is a challenge even for  the smartest of traders on the wall street.  investors are often overwhelmed by the large amount of stocks which can be even  more than 100,000 stocks that trade on different exchanges all around the world.  so if you have to navigate through a plethora of stocks,  which are essentially opportunities for investments, and you also have to  navigate through risks, through timing issues, and a lot of other uncertainties.  so building up successful portfolio is, in my view, is part art and a bit of science.  in fact, it's probably half, half.  it's half art and half science.  the art part is in the market and  stock timing as we have discussed in the early lectures.  the science is in how to maximize your returns  with as less risk as possible which is what we'll discuss in this lecture.  so risks and diversity reward and diversification,,  these are some of the most important concepts that we  need to understand before we start our portfolio.  there are factors that come into play in all investment decisions.  investors need to learn a little bit more than  just the textbook definitions of these factors.  and you need to understand how they, in conjunction with  market timing and business cycles, affect portfolios.  even risk, when properly managed and  understood, can even help your portfolio.  and there are different levels of risks and different types of diversification.  simply put, risk is the term that is used to determine the volatility or  the uncertainty of your investment results.  so this typically goes hand in hand with returns.  the more risk you take, more often than not, the higher is the expected return.  conversely, the lower the risk you take, the lower the risk of the return.  when we say return, it generally means profit.  in the investing world it's usually expressed as a percentage and  is often annualized.  for instance, if you're investing $100 and  getting a $6 profit in, say, a couple of years, you have a return or  profit percentage of 6% and an annual return of 3%.  if you're investing $100 and making, let's say, a $50 profit over two years,  that's 50% return over two years and an annual return of 25%.  to understand, that was return, so let's understand risk now and risk tolerance.  so to understand risk tolerance,  let's look at a very simple example that i often give to my friends.  let's say there are four friends, a, b, c and d, and let's put some name for that.  let's call them a for adam, b for bob, c for charlie and d for david, okay.  and let's say each of them have very different ways of investing their money.  and let's say each of them have $100 in their pocket and  they want to invest it in their own ways.  and they invest differently because they have very different  levels of risk tolerance.  so let's say adam is extremely risk averse, and  keeps his $100 in his pant pocket or keeps his cash in an old jam jar.  i mean, he sleeps very soundly knowing that he will always have  $100 in the jar because it can't go anywhere.  then you have bob who is also risk averse but he deposits his $100 in,  let's say, a money market account at the biggest bank, the oldest bank in town.  and that money market account pays, say, 1% and  bob is positive in 12 months and  he'll have essentially 1% on $100 which is, he'll have $101 in that account.  the third guy, charlie, he likes to take some risk,  and let's say he bought $100 worth of ibm shares.  he researches the stock and discovers that,  over the last ten years, ibm's annual return has varied from,  let's say, negative 10% to a positive of 50%.  so he is somewhat confident that his $100 investment will turn in  somewhere between say $90 and $157, minus 10% and plus 57%.  the fourth guy, david, his broker friend, he has a very curious way of investing.  and let's say his broker friend has tipped him about a stock,  let's call it xyz, and it's a barter company.  this barter company has run, say,  some preliminary tests on a drug that seems to be curing cancer patients.  and it seems to cure six out of ten patients that it has been tried out on.  and now they're planning a larger test with, let's say, 1,000 people.  and david's broker says that if the second test has similar results as the first one,  then the stock will pop from $1 to $100 over the next year.  and if it doesn't go well then the company's bust,  it's out of cash and will likely have to fold.  so david buys $100 of shares of this company xyz at $1  hoping that the stock will at least become triple or become ten times.  but he also know that there's a lot of chance, a very high chance,  that the company will be bankrupt and he will lose his investment.  obviously, these are four different personalities with four different risk  tolerances and with four different return expectations of what they're going to get.  since none of us have a crystal ball and so we don't know,  and none of those friends also know what their final return will be in a year.  for instance, adam might mistakenly you know essentially  put his bag in the laundry and that $100 may get washed up.  or he may throw away the jar because he forgot that he put $100 there.  bob's bank could discover that its funds were stolen by a malicious ponzi scheme.  charlie's ibm stock could turn worthless if a company  collapsed, like if ibm collapses like enron.  and david's bet on xyz stock could be worth either 100 times  which would be 10,000 or nothing which is 0.  so a primary investment goal for all investors is to minimize risk,  and diversification is the most reliable way of doing so.  diversification essentially means spreading risks around so  that all your eggs are not in the same basket.  your home or car insurance works much the same way by spreading individual  risks between everyone who pays their insurance premium.  but suppose the four friends have a fifth friend, let's call him e for  edward, who can't make up his mind as to what to do with his $100.  so he adopts all the four strategies at the same time.  so and thereby diversifes his $100 by investing, say,  $25 in each of their styles.  he keeps $25 in cash.  he keeps $25 in money market accounts.  he keeps $25 in a blue chip stock, which is a low risk stock,  and $25 on a riskier, potentially high return biotech investment.  mathematically, diversification is about minimizing the variants in your  returns by averaging the expected returns of each of your stocks.  so if stock a has a return of minus 50%, the 50% a year and  stock b has a return of, say, minus 10% or 10% a year, plus 10% a year,  then it would make sense that a portfolio that was 50% invested in  each of these stocks would expect to have returns between minus 30% to plus 30%.  now if you add stock c which always returns 5%,  then a portfolio which is equally weighted between a, b and  c would have expected returns between minus 18% and plus 22%.  so now but if i can put, let's say, 50% in c and  25% in each a and b, then we are at minus 13% to a plus 8%.  now suppose that we add a stock d to our portfolio which moves opposite to stock a.  so when stock a loses 50%, stock b is gaining 20%.  and if stock a is gaining 50%, stock b loses 5%.  our equally weighted portfolio of a, b, c and  d now has expected returns in the minus 9% to plus 15% range.  so we can average out returns by buying different stocks.  but the most important way to diversify is across different industries,  different sectors, and different geographies so  that each of our stocks doesn't perform at its worst at any point in time.  [music] 
learning outcomes, after watching this video,  you will be able to explain what calling a bond means.  you will also be able to understand and explain  when it is economically beneficial for the bond issuer to call the bond.  calling a bond, calling a bond means that the issuer exercises  the right to repay the principle of the bond before the maturity date of the bond.  most bonds today should now have this call provision, i.e,  they have the right to call a bond before the bond actually matures.  now this right, or this call provision, gives the issuer greater  flexibility to respond to changes in the general level of interest rates.  for example, if a corporation had issued a bond way back in 2005 or 2006,  when interest rates were high, and it was let's say a 20 year bond,  then the corporation is obligated to provide a very high interest rate for  the next 20 years from 2005 to 2025.  the corporation would have to pay a high interest rate.  on the other hand, if the bond had a call provision,  then what the issuer can do is basically call back the bond or  retire the bond and reissue the bond at a lower interest rate.  so, if the bond has been issued in a period of high interest rate, and  if interest rate subsequently declined,  to a level that the same bond could be issued at a lower coupon, then,  it would be in the corporation's advantage to retire the old bond and  reissue new bonds at a lower interest rate.  in fact, this savings on interest cost can be so significant,  often it can be in millions of dollars for a bond, which has issue size  of a billion dollars or more.  and typically, issuers redeem the bond at a premium above the face value,  and normally the premium amounts to one year of interest rates.  so for instance, if a bond had a coupon of say 10%, and  the face value of the bond was $1000, it might be called at $11000,  i.e., a premium of 10% which is the coupon of the bond.  most bonds are not subject to a call provision  until a specified number of years that have elapsed.  typically, these are five years or ten years in long term bonds.  so, after that period, the bond can be called at any time,  at a specified price of the issuer that the issuer stipulates or  it can be done no typically once in a year, for  all the years until the first call date.  so, in addition to this optional call method,  a lot of bonds can also be retired through what is called a sinking fund.  now, once a sinking fund is established,  the issuer must kind of keep aside an amount of money each year for  periodic retirements of this particular bond issuance.  now this normally enhances the security of the remaining bonds,  because now the issuer has to pay less as  part of the bond has been repaid back, has been bought back using the sinking fund.  when new bonds are issued,  investment bankers often say that they are floating a new issue.  so it's understandable that a bond retirement program or a bond retirement  fund is actually called a sinking fund, as opposed to floating of new issues.  you're basically retiring bonds, and that's what is called a sinking fund.  so the bonds to be retired each year can either be called at a specified price,  or they can even be purchased in the open market at the price that's prevailing.  occasionally the sinking fund payments are allowed to accumulate, while  earning interest so that the entire issue can eventually be retired at one time.  so if you are an investor, and if you ignore a call feature,  you could be subject to an expensive surprise.  you could be surprised, and that surprise could be pretty expensive for  you in terms of money.  so if the bonds are unexpectedly called,  you as a bond holder might get the principal amount back sooner,  but you may actually lose what may have been an attractive yield.  so, if you recall the example that i discussed earlier, so  a corporation which had issued a bond in 2005, a 20 year bond and the bond had  a fairly high coupon because the interest rates, pre-crisis, were higher then.  and if you are the holder of the bond, you could be enjoying a high interest rate,  a high return, a high coupon on the bond for the next 20 years.  but then if the issuer of the bond decides to call the issue, you may be in for  an expensive surprise in the sense that now if you have to get back the money and  buy a new bond, then that particular bond will typically earn you much less.  the coupon would be much lower than what this bond,  which was issued pre-crisis, in say 2005.  it was 20 year bond, so you could have got a lot of very high interest  payments over a 20 year time period, but because the bond has been  called you may not be enjoying the benefits of the high interest rate.  now on the other hand, for the corporation, it's a good feature to have  because if a corporation had issued a bond at a fairly high interest rate,  and then interest rates in general came down over a period of time,  then you now have the flexibility to retire the old bond and  basically reissue bonds at a much lower interest rate.  so now if you as a bond holder do not cognize for  this call feature, as i said, you could be in for  an expensive surprise because you may even lose part of your principal.  now this would occur if a bond had been purchased at a substantial premium,  but it has been called at a price close to par.  so let's say interest rates went down, and you bought the bond at  a fairly high price, because the interest rates are usually lower.  and then you basically now have the principal returned to face value,  because a bond is now called, you could potentially lose money.  so you have to be very careful in terms of the call feature of bonds.  and so, for these reasons, you as a potential board investor,  should carefully examine the call and the sinking fund provision with your broker,  or the bond dealer to better understand the risks that are involved. 
[music]  learning outcomes, after watching this video you will be able to understand  the correlation and the interrelationship between currency markets and  other markets such as gold, oil, equity and bonds.  as much as we would like to think of the forex markets as the be all and  end all of financial market trading, it doesn't actually exist in a vacuum.  you may have heard of some of these other markets, such as gold, oil,  stocks and bonds.  there's a fair amount of noise and misinformation about these markets and  the supposed interrelationships among these markets, and  currencies or say dual currency pairs and these markets.  to be sure you can always find a correlation between  two different markets over some period of time.  but always keep in mind that all the various financial markets  are markets in their own right.  and function according to their own internal data mix based on data,  news, positioning and sentiment.  now, do markets occasionally overlap and display varying degrees of correlation?  of course they do,  and it's always important to be aware of what's going in other flashy markets.  it's also essential to view each market in it's own perspective and  to create each market individually.  so let's look at some of the other key financial markets and  see what conclusions we can draw for currency markets.  first gold, gold is commonly viewed  as a hedge against inflation, an alternative to the us dollar.  and as a storage of value in times of economic or political uncertainty.  over the long term, the relationship is mostly inverse  with a weaker us dollar generally accompanying a higher gold price.  and a stronger us dollar coming with a lower gold price.  however in the short run each market has its own dynamics and  liquidity, which makes short term trading relationships generally tenuous.  overall, the gold market is significantly smaller than the forex market.  so if i were a gold trader, then i would  keep an eye on what's happening to the dollar rather than the other way around.  as i mentioned in an earlier video, the effects market is the big daddy of  financial markets, dwarfing equity, fixed income, and commodities.  so other markets tend to keep a view on  the us dollar rather than the other way around.  with that noted, extreme movements in gold prices tend to attract currency traders  attention, and usually influence the dollar in mostly inverse fashion.  second, oil, a lot of misinformation exists on internet  chatrooms about the supposed relationship between oil and us dollar, or  other currencies such as canadian dollar or yen.  the idea is that, because some countries are oil producers,  their currencies are positively correlated,  or positively effected by increases in the price of oil.  if the country's an importer of oil, and today, which country doesn't import?  theory goes that that country's currency will be hurt by higher oil prices.  [cough] correlation studies, of course,  show no appreciable relationship to that effect.  especially in the short run, which is where most currency trading is focused.  when there is a long-term relationship, it's as evident as the us dollar,  as much as, or more than, any other individual currency,  whether with an importer or an exporter of the black gold.  the best way to look at oil is an inflation input and  as a limiting factor of overall economic growth.  the higher the prices of oil, the higher inflation is likely to be, and  the slower an economy is likely to grow.  the lower the price of oil, the lower inflationary pressures are likely, but  not necessarily to be.  so the inflationary pressures typically will be lower.  so we like the fact that the changes in the price of oil into our inflation and  growth expectations.  and then draw conclusions about the course of the us dollar from them.  about oil, oil is just one input among many,  and that's something that we should keep in mind.  stocks, stocks are micro economic securities rising and  falling in response to individual corporate results and prospects.  while currencies are essentially macroeconomic securities  fluctuating in response to wider range in economic and political developments.  as such, there is little intuitive reasons  that stock market should be related to currencies.  long term correlation studies build this out with correlation coefficients  of essentially close to zero, between major us dollar pairs and  us equity markets or as large a time horizon as five years.  the two markets occasionally intersect,  though this is usually only at the exchange and for very short few years.  for example, when equity markets reach extraordinary levels,  let's say for instance s&p 500 loses more than two percentage points in a day.  the us dollar may experience more pressure than it otherwise would but  there's no guarantee of that happening.  the us stock market may have dropped in an unexpected hike in us interest rates.  while the us dollar may rally on these price moves, so,  things can go quite all right.  finally, bonds, fixed income, or bond markets,  have a more intuitive connection to forex markets.  because they're both heavily influenced by interest rate expectations.  however, short term market dynamics of supply and demand interrupt most attempts  to establish a viable link between the two markets on a short term basis.  sometimes the forex market reacts first and  is fastest to react depending on shifts in interest rate expectations.  at other times, the bond market may accurately reflect changes in  interest rate expectation, with the forex market later playing catch up.  overall, currency traders keep an eye on the yield of  the benchmark board of the major currencies to better monitor  the expectations of the interest rate markets.  changes in relative interest rates or  interest rates differentials exert a major influence on forex markets.  that's broadly the effect that stocks,  bonds, gold, oil have on currency markets.  but as i said earlier, the currency markets are really the big  boss or the big players in the financial markets, this is really the big daddy.  so, financial,  other markets tend to look to the fx markets than the other way around.  so, you wouldn't find too many forex traders actually looking at gold,  or oil, or stocks, or bonds.  but you'd often find a lot of bond traders, stock, equity traders,  traders of gold and oil, actually keeping a tab on the forex markets.  [music] 
[music]  learning goals, after watching this video you will be  able to explain gdp or the gross domestic product.  you will also be able to predict the response of the stock markets,  bond markets and currency markets to the gdp data.  gdp they're the best known any shows in economics and just in case you haven't  heard of it, it's stands for, guess what gross domestic product.  it's the mother of all economic indicators and  the most important status stake, it by the way, gdp comes out every quarter.  the gdp is a must to watch for all investors,  because it is the best overall barometer of the economies ups and downs.  macro economists analyze it carefully for hints on where the economies heading.  ceo's use it to help compose business plans,  make hiring decisions, estimates sales growth.  government officials view the gdp as a report card on how well or  how badly their own policies have been working.  for these and many other reasons, the gdp report is one of the most greatly  anticipated economic data, simply put, the gdp is the total price tag  in domestic currency of all goods and services made in the economy.  it's the sum value of all cars, new homes,  baby food, video games, medical fees, books, toothpaste,  sandwiches, hammers, haircuts, eyeglasses, yards, kites, computers.  i mean, you get the idea, right?  all the stuff that was sold in the economy,  are exported during a specific time period.  even goods that are not sold but ended up on the stock room,  they are also included in the gdp, because these perhaps were still assembled,  even though they are still on the stock room shelves and not haven't been sold,  but this still are counted in the gdp data, because they were still assembled.  the gdp therefore, reflects the final value of all output in the economy  regardless of whether it was sold or placed in inventory.  when you look at gdp performance, across countries all over the globe, it  becomes quite evident that most economies have a natural tendencies to grow.  business activity has expanded in far more years than it has contracted.  the faster and longer the economy grows, the higher the level of employment.  and when more people are working, total household income goes up,  this encourages them to spend more on stuff, on goods and services.  as consumer spending accelerates, companies are inclined to speed up  their own production, and hire additional workers.  that in turn, further increases household income, and  voila, you have a huge economic expansion.  moreover the benefit of growth are not just felt inside the economy,  stronger economic growth stimulates foreign businesses as well, because people  will import more cars, will buy more clothing, will buy more jewelry, shoes,  home electronics from other countries and that helps revitalize the global economy.  so what effect does robust gdp number have on stocks, bonds and currencies?  first, the stock market, stocks, the equity markets reaction to the gdp report  depends on whether it's better than expected, or worse than expected a healthy  economy generates more business earnings while a sluggish economy  basically depresses sales and also has reduced income.  however, there is an important qualification there, if economic activity  has been racing ahead, for several quarters, even shareholders and  equity holders start to get a little nervous about rising prices.  because high inflation can cause an erosion of household purchasing power, and  probably will force interest rates higher in future.  therefore, the equity markets can be as uncomfortable  with an economy growing too quickly as it is when it is moving far too slow.  as regards bonds, and the actual gdp's release the first question that is there  on every bondholder's mind is how it compares with expectations.  if the economy is growing at below the pace predicted by economists,  the bull market is likely to react positively.  especially if real final sales are anemic and unwanted inventories are ballooning.  conversely if gdp growth numbers exceed expectations and the inflation embassies  are showing signs of accelerating it could be a nightmare for bond holders.  a strong gdp report combined with rising inflation pressures  will spread fears that the central bank will sooner or later intervene and  raise short term rates to cool down the economy.  and unless investors are confident that the central bank will not raise interest  rates chances are that bond prices will plummet and because yields to spike.  what happens to currencies?  to foreign investors a strong economy is viewed more favorably than a weak one.  so robust economic activity spurs corporate profits and  firms up into straights.  therefore foreign investors see opportunities to make money in the stock  market and from high yielding bonds.  all this increases a demand for domestic currency if the central bank  moves quickly to preempt inflation by driving up short term interest rates.  odds are that this would also lead to a depreciation off the domestic currency,  because of the perception that the central bank is ahead of the curve in containing  price ratios.  however, if inflation accelerates and stays at a very high level,  meaning prices are increasing quite a lot, it would lower competitiveness  of the country and the world and worsen the country's foreign trade deficit,  a scenario that can make the domestic currency far less appealing.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video you will be able to explain the manufacturing  survey economic indicator.  you will also be able to predict the movements of the stock markets,  bond markets and currency markets in response to the manufacturing survey data.  manufacturing survey.  you might choose to ignore this economic indicator because of it's less than  riveting name.  so here's a warning, please don't ignore.  it's the most influential statistic released by the private sector.  the organization behind this market moving cds typically is a group  that represents corporate purchasing managers around the country.  so this raises an immediate question.  how is it that a bunch of purchasing managers in manufacturing  can hold such sway over the investment community?  the answer can be found by understanding what corporate purchasing agents do.  manufacturing companies need lots of supplies to make products.  those in charge of procuring this material for the companies are purchasing managers.  a sample of items they might order includes lighting,  packing boxes, inks, computers, etc.  so if there is a pick up in demand for manufactured products, purchasing managers  quickly respond by increasing orders for production material and other supplies.  if manufacturing sales slow,  those corporate buyers will cut back on industrial orders.  therefore, by virtue of their position,  purchasing managers are in the forefront of monitoring activity in manufacturing.  that's important, because the goods producing industry is highly sensitive  to the ebb and flow of businesses in the broader economy.  so how does this data affect stocks, bonds and currencies?  the equity markets react positively to a strong manufacturing survey  outlook particularly if it's after a period of slow economic growth.  of course, if the manufacturing measure jumps at a time when business activity is  already in high gear or soaring, stock prices could drop as worries  mount that the economy may be in danger of overheating or inflation may increase.  this raises the probability that the central bank  will boost interest rates to cool business activity.  that might be bad for stocks but  in general a strong manufacturing survey report is good for stock markets.  bonds.  a place in the bond market, the manufacturing survey is one of  a handful of indicators that can truly shake things up.  adding to it's reputation as a major market mover is the manufacturing survey's  history of frustrating even the best of forecasters.  just how the bond markets will react to manufacturing survey data  depends largely on where the economy stands in the business cycle.  normally, investors view a robust manufacturing data as bearish for  fixed income, especially if the economy is well into its expansionary phase because  that can aggravate inflationary pressures and invite higher interest rates.  a less than expected data, however, could energize the bond markets because it  denotes serious weakness in manufacturing and perhaps for the broader economy.  what impact does it have on currencies?  if the economy is fundamentally healthy and inflation is in check,  the currency will likely bounce higher on a strong manufacturing survey report.  on the other hand, should the report portray a manufacturing sector that's  problematic and is teetering on recession, foreigners,  especially foreign investors, might sell some of their investments  depressing the currencys value against other key currencies.  a manufacturing sector that is not doing very well, as in recession,  might induce foreign investors to sell some of their investments and  thereby depress currency's value against other key currencies.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you will know what business cycles mean and  understand the crests and troughs of business cycles.  you will also understand the crests and  troughs of financial markets ie, bull and bear markets.  now that you know what the stock market is and  what role the stock exchanges play, let's take a step back and  look at how stock prices and the economy move in tandem.  timing is extremely important investing and  your first plan is to understand business cycles.  understanding what business cycles is,  is actually relatively easy, but predicting them is nearly impossible.  even the best of economists struggle at it.  we've all heard of terms, like recession, depression, expansion, boom and bust.  the economy seems to go strongly for a while in which case everyone has a job.  we hear about stock market selling new highs and consumers are spending freely.  then, suddenly, we hear about companies that have over billed,  there are layoffs, foreclosures, and wage freezes.  you may not have realized it, but you were actually witnessing the ups and  downs of a business cycle.  now let's not confuse one company's sudden success with business cycles.  fads, single industries, or  market conditions seldom influence a business cycle.  like a perfect storm,  business cycles are the product of a lot of competence coming together.  as an investor, you should understand these crests and  troughs and just accept that they happen.  it's never a question of if,  it's only a question of when a business cycle will peak or bottom out.  investing just before a peak can be extremely costly.  conversely, on the other hand, investing at the bottom can be extremely profitable.  knowing where you are at the overall business cycle is very  important as an investor.  as you might expect, just as the economy moves in cycles, so does the stock market.  in fact, the stock market generally moved in advance of the business cycle  because the stock prices are based  on both past earnings and future expectations of earnings.  you might have heard of terms like bull and  bear markets [cough] and probably understand them as well.  bull and bear markets play a strong role in extending or  contracting business cycles.  a lot of things have been said about the bull and bear markets, but  here's what you really need to know.  in a bull market, the majority of investors feel extremely positive  about the current business cycle, feel positive about the stock market and  the overall economic condition.  so a lot of investors leave the spectator position,  just watching the markets, and actually get into the game and buy stocks.  more investors means more money in the market, more money in the market usually  translates to more buying activity and higher stock prices.  [cough] now that's a perfect example of supply and demand in action.  you might have heard of terms or aphorisms,  like the trend is your friend and buy low and sell high.  these are classic pearls of wisdom that is given during bull markets.  in a bear market, there is a counterintuitive saying,  which is essentially sell high and buy low.  bear markets indicate that investor confidence is down.  the investor community perceives that the current business cycle is at or  in a downturn, it's at bottom or in a downturn.  a lot of investors tend to retreat to just to watching it,  as a retreat to a spectator position and sell their stocks.  now in bear markets, investors are fearful about the prospects for investing, and  as money leaves the market, stock prices tend to drop.  and that's the reason why these two market extremes are called bull and bear market.  i mean, actually, it's not really clear why people call it bull and bear market.  some say that a bull wants to buck up prices, while the bear wants to claw  down prices, or that a bull market charges ahead like a bull does,  while a bear market is going into hibernation.  so in any case, the bull and bear, they are iconic symbols on wall street.  and they keep on fighting for control over the market's overall direction.  as an investor,  you need to know who is winning the battle and invest appropriately.  so once you understand the trend of bull or bear,  treat the trend as your friend, and if you are in a bull market and  their trend is up, then it's a perfect time to buy low and sell high.  in a bear market, the trend is still your friend, and  there are ways to make money when stock prices are declining.  the mere perception that a market is becoming bearish is not a predictor  of disaster.  fortunes have been made in bear markets,  the trick is to know when one is coming and react appropriately.  if one can learn to anticipate market trends before they occur,  you will become a very successful investor.  be careful though, timing, which can make or lose you money,  is not very easy to master.  there is no simple secret to getting it right all the time.  timing markets requires you to be actually correct twice,  first, when you buy the stock at a cheap price, and  a second time when you sell it back at a higher price.  a lot of investors have a very hard time simply buying low, let alone selling high.  there can be serious costs if you have poor market timing.  unlike other investments, like say,  real estate, stock trading often comes with a very short clock.  prices can change for better or for worse very quickly.  even traders, expert stock pickers experience losses because of timing.  the best thing an investor can hope for  is merely to be right a bit more  often than being wrong.  [music] 
learning outcomes.  after watching this video,  you will be able to describe the features of the municipal bonds.  you will also be able to differentiate between general obligation bonds and  revenue bonds.  a municipal bond is a bond issued by a sovereign local government or  a particular territory of a particular nation or other government agencies.  the term is commonly used in the united states,  which is the largest market for municipal bonds and  the estimated size of the municipal bond market is more than $4 trillion in the us.  now potential issuers of municipal bonds include states, cities,  counties, school districts, public utility districts,  publicly owned airports, sea ports and so on.  it could also be any other entity or  a group of at the local or state level.  municipal bonds can be either general obligation of the issuer or  can be secured by specified revenues.  so essentially, you have two basic types of municipal bonds called  as the general obligation bonds.  and basically, revenue bonds.  general obligation bonds have principal and  interest that are secured by the full fate, and credit of the issuer,  and they're usually supported by either the issuer's taxing power.  it could be limited or unlimited taxing power and  that's what supports the municipal bonds.  now in many cases, general obligation bonds are [inaudible] approved.  the second category is revenue bonds.  in revenue bonds, principle and  interest are secured by revenues derived from tolls, charges or  rent from specialties that have been built with the proceeds of the bonds issues.  so when you issue a bond, you basically get some bond proceeds and  you deploy them in projects and the revenue that is gotten from these projects  are essentially used for servicing the revenue bonds.  now public projects financed by revenue bonds can include toll roads,  bridges, airports, water and sewage treatment facilities.  it could include hospitals or even subsidized housing.  now, many of these bonds issued by special authorities created for  that particular purpose.  now, most municipal bonds and notes are typically issued  in denominations of $5,000 or multiples of $5,000.  now as i said, municipal bonds are issued by states, cities,  counties to raise funds.  and in some sense, they basically  exercise the issuers borrowing power.  municipal bonds and municipal bond holders can basically be bond holders.  municipal bond holders can purchase bonds either directly from the issuer  at the time of issuance, i.e., in the primary market or from other bond  holders at another point in time after issuance that is in the secondary market.  now in exchange for upfront investment capital like all bonds, the municipal bond  holder receives payments over a period of time, which is composed of interest.  and eventually, you basically get back the principal.  now, municipal bonds are more often than not tax exempt.  so, comparing the coupon rates of municipal bonds to corporate bonds or  other taxable bonds can be a bit misleading.  now, because taxes reduce the net income on taxable bonds,  meaning that a tax exempt municipal bond has a higher return or  a higher after tax yield than a corporate bond with the same coupon trade.  so in general, because of the tax exempt feature of municipal bonds,  the interest rates typically tend to be several percentage points or several basis  points below the going rate on corporate bonds of comparable quality and trading.  so in other words, a municipal bond will often provide the same after  tax yield to an investor as a corporate bond tries to yield several points more or  several percentage points more or several basis points more on the coupon.  now many of the countries in the world apart from the us also issue municipal  bonds, they're sometimes called local authority bonds or have other names.  the key defining feature of this type of bond is that they are issued by a public  entity at a lower level of governance than the federal government or  the sovereign government.  as a result, it's possible that the municipality can default,  even when the country or the federal government may not default.  so it's important to remember that we know the current quality or  the chance of a default of a municipal bond issuer is a lot  higher than that of the sovereign, or the government bond.  because at the end of the day, the government has the ability to print money,  which obviously, a state or a government entity lower than that certainly does not.  so essentially, two key things that you may want to take away and remember.  one, municipal bonds have tax exempt features.  so therefore, the coupon rates tend to be lower  than that of corporate bonds of similar risk rating.  secondly, even though they are, these are government entities.  there is a possibility of a default, i.e.,  your interest payment, your principal may never come back.  however and for the compensation for the increased risk,  you basically get a higher return than government bonds.  so, tax exempt feature.  and secondly, the greater risk of default as compared to government bonds. 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching the video, you will under what bid prices, offer prices, and  spreads mean.  you will understand the currency codes.  you will be able to differentiate between the big figure and the dealing price.  we will now look at how currency prices are displayed.  and what they mean for trade and order execution.  so, while i'll be discussing about a particular way of quotation,  please do keep in mind that different brokers use  different formats to display prices on their training platform.  so, it may differ from what you might,  what i might discuss in this particular lecture.  retail traders, people investors like you and  me are typically faced with a fairly large transaction cost,  which is basically defined by bid and offer spread, and  the bid and offer spread can be anywhere between two to five pips.  so let's understand what do we mean by bids and offers.  so let's say you have a trading account with your broker,  and you're in front of your screen and looking at a broker streaming platform.  you'll basically see two prices for each currency pair.  the price on the left hand side is called the bid and  the price on the right hand side is called as the offer.  some also call this the ask price.  the bid is a price at which you can sell the base currency and  the offer is a price at which you can buy the base currency.  please note that some brokers display their prices above and below each other.  with the bid on the bottom and the offer on the top.  that's easy to remember.  bid on the bottom, okay?  the easy way to tell the difference and one of the easy way of telling  the difference is that the bid price is always lower than the offer price.  the price quotation of each built in offer.  you'll see you have two competence, what is called a big figure, and  the dealing price.  the big figure refers to the first three digits of the overall currency rate, and  is usually shown in a smaller foreign size, or sometimes, even in shadow.  the dealing price refers to the last two digits of the overall currency price and  is normally brightly displayed in a pretty large font size.  for example, in the picture in your screens, the full euro usd price  quotation is 1.349395 or 1995, as is called.  the 1.34 is normally and 1.34 is the big figure, and  is there to show you the full price level, and that is what we call a big figure.  it's there to show you the full price level the market is currently trading at.  the 9395 portion of the price is the bid offer dealing price.  the spread is the difference between the bid price and the offer price.  most forex brokers utilize spread base training platforms for  the retail traders, individual traders like you and me.  you can think of the spread as the compensation the broker receives for  being the market maker and executing our trades.  spreads vary from broker to broker and by currency pair at each broker.  and so, brokers basically charge different bid offer spreads.  generally, the more liquid the currency pairs, the narrow the spread.  the less liquid the currency pair, the wider the spread.  this is especially the case for some of the less traded crosses.  so that's essentially bid offer spreads.  and essentially how you can think of transaction costs and broker charges.  bid is basically the lower price and offer is the higher price.  when you want to buy, you basically hit the offer side of the broker.  when you want to sell you hit the bid side of the broker.  and that bid offer spread is the margin that your broker is making as profits for  essentially doing the market-making for you.  okay, now having understood the bid offers,  let's also understand a little bit about trading styles.  so how do you choose your trading style,  if you've had to actively trade in the fullest market.  before we actually actively trade the market, it perhaps help  to take a step back and think about how you would want to approach the market.  there's more to currency trading than meets the eye.  and the trading style that we  choose is one of the most important determinants of overall training success.  so you know what i call as different strokes for different folks.  there are as many trading styles and  market approaches in fx as there are in in the indian market.  but most trading styles can be grouped into some buckets that  boil down to varying degrees of exposure to market risk.  the two main elements of market risk are time and elective price movements.  the longer we hold a position the more risk we are exposed to.  the more of a price change that we are anticipating the more risk  we are exposed to.  my aim here at this lecture is not to advocate or i won't be advocating  a certain particular training style because styles frequently over lap.  and you can adapt different styles for  different trade opportunities as a lot of professional traders do.  or they also change trading styles based on market conditions.  my goal here in this lecture is to give you an idea of the various approaches used  for ex-market professionals so that you can understand the basis of each style.  what i'll be doing in the next two lectures is essentially  look at short term high frequency trading strategies, and  contrast that with, in the next lecture, with medium term directional trading.  so we'll basically look at short term trading in the next lecture and  in the lecture after that, we will basically look at medium term trading.  which would predominantly would be directional trading.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you'll be able to understand the different ways in  which you can diversify your portfolio.  you will learn how to classify companies based on size.  and you'll understand the significance of risk reward ratio or the sharp ratio.  in the last lecture, we spoke about diversification.  and in this lecture,  we'll discuss some of the ways to accomplish our diversification.  the first way you can accomplish diversification is through across stocks.  it certainly helps to have more than one stock in your portfolio.  normally, it takes a minimum of 30 stocks to have a very diversified portfolio.  though one can be pretty well diversified even with a portfolio of only 10 stocks  as long as they are very diverse.  the second way in which you can get diversification is across industries.  investing in different industries spreads around the risk that  any one industry could suffer a severe slump.  of example, totally investing in oil, real estate, or  car makers may generate wonderful returns in the short term.  but a down turn in any one of the industries,  will wreak havoc with your overall portfolio.  okay?  one of the industries that has been, that has seen a recent slump is essentially,  the steel industry.  which has steel prices that have actually fallen by nearly more than half  in the last one year.  so, if you had invested all your stocks in steel companies,  let's say nippon steel or mittal steel.  then the kind of returns that you would have had  would be extremely low, in fact extremely negative.  so it also helps to actually diversify across industries.  you could also accomplish diversification and  get diversification by investing across market capitalizations.  market capitalization, or market cap for short, is a way to identify and classify  companies by the size of the total value of their outstanding public stock.  typically, stocks are classified as either large cap,  which is essentially greater than $10 billion.  you have mid-cap which is typically $1 to $10 billion and  small cap which is less than $1 billion.  there are also, these days there are also newer classifications like,  we call some companies mega cap.  these are companies with a market capitalization of greater than  $100 billion.  there are also companies which are called micro-cap,  these are less than $100 million.  there are also terminologies floating around like nano cap,  which is less than $10 million.  you can actually classify companies along these lines.  or a different method of your own creation, and that's perfectly fine.  the key is to actually consider investing across differently sized market caps  to mitigate risks, and increase the diversity of your portfolio.  you can also diversify across dividend yields.  so some companies differ widely, in fact,  companies quite often differ widely in their approaches to paying dividends.  some board of directors strongly favor distributing the earnings in the forms of  dividend payments.  while others want to conserve cash to fund maybe,  fund growth or fund r&d, research and development that is.  but inverting in some securities with a track record of high dividend yields, and  also those that display cash conservation to fund new products or expansion.  and therefore, pay less dividends.  you can actually gain some risk protection and diversification across dividends.  you can also get diversification by investing in international and  emerging markets.  so, for instance, large globalization has essentially made that,  emerging markets are now an excellent target for investments.  if you're based in the us investing in china may seem like risky,  but it's actually one of the fastest growing economies and  the second largest economy in the world right now, as we speak.  there are also other very exciting countries like brazil.  russia, india, which along with china are called as the brick nations.  so, emerging markets such as brazil, russia,  india, china, are growing pretty fast, and  the national economies are extremely robust.  and that tends to get reflected in the market of recorded philosophy as well.  these countries seek direct investments at all levels of funding including from small  investors.  so, if you do your homework,  you may find some wonderful opportunities to add to your portfolio.  and also manage the risk factor while enjoying extremely good returns  that is earnings and appreciations of stock price.  please note that international markets in general can be riskier  than mature markets like north america, europe or japan.  but they also offer highly attractive returns.  you cannot achieve diversification by investing in precious metals,  commodities that is.  so a lot of investors invest in precious metals such as gold and  silver as diversification and risk mitigation tools.  once again, you should become familiar and comfortable with the historical  price movements of precious metals, and the global economic conditions that  have preceded, or existed during those price moments.  in addition, precious metals have inherent value, along with market pricing.  you can do dollar cost averaging which is design to reduce risk.  dollar cost averaging strategies essentially dictate that you buy smaller  blocks of the same security over time to reach the investment position you want,  instead of making large lump sum purchases.  this often smooths out the cost factor of the securities,  to help you manage the vagaries of market price changes, both up and down.  the relationship between a portfolio's variance, and its return, is normally  expressed using a noble prize winner's william sharpe's self titled sharpe ratio.  which allows you to determine the excess return or  reward that you're getting per unit of risk.  the higher the sharpe ratio, the greater the return for the same amount of risk.  [music] 
learning outcomes.  after watching this video you will be able to understand the working of  the rating agencies.  you will also be able to assess the creditworthiness of a bond  issuer based on its ratings.  now as you understand, bonds are basically ious,  which essentially means that corporations or  governments or agencies borrow money from you and  promise to repay that after a certain point of time.  so, one of the key things that you need to analyze before you invest in a particular  bond is to check out the probability of the money coming back to you.  or in other words, what are the chances that the corporation or  the agency does not repay the money that it has borrowed from you.  and it's very difficult for individual bond investors to research  each corporation before they actually invest in the bond.  so this particular function of assessing the chance  of the bond issuer not repaying the money, or  in other words, the bond issuer defaulting is done  by firms called as rating agencies.  so, and they assign what are called as ratings.  so ratings basically measure the probability of a bond issuer  repaying the principal amount at maturity and  meeting all the scheduled interest payments.  so viewed another way, the rating agencies essentially rank  issues according to their perceived risk of default.  so they computed and published by independent organizations who  try to make an objective assessment of the risk of the principal not being returned.  the two best known rating agencies in the globally standard & poor's and moody's.  the ratings are available on a subscription basis, and it's  available in a variety of publications that can usually be found in the internet,  or the brokerage office through which you invest in the bonds can email them to you.  so together, these two rating agencies rate almost all the bonds  that are publicly issued, be it from corporations, be it from municipals,  be it from governments, so s&p and moody's rate all  treasury securities, bonds issued by agencies and so on.  so basically moody's and  s&p together rate almost all the bonds that are publicly issued.  however, they do not  rate privately placed bonds unless they're asked to do that for a fee.  so now in recent years almost  half of all the bond issues that have happened have been privately placed,  which simply means that investors, which are usually institutions, have  purchased these bonds directly from the issuer without any public distribution.  now the rating agencies use a very simple system of letters to assign ratings  which indicate their judgment of an issue's safety of principal and  interest payments stability.  so s&p, standard & poor's, ranks bonds from highest quality to lowest,  by using the first four letters of the alphabet in groups of three.  and they actually go as follows, it's triple a, which is aaa, double a,  single a, triple b, double b, single b, and so on, all the way through d.  bonds which carry a rating of d are in default,  which means that there is considerable uncertainty.  so bonds which have a rating of d are in default.  now investors commonly refer to the highest rating as aaa, okay.  now a aaa security is as risk-free as it possibly can get, okay.  now, moody's also uses a similar rating as that of s&p, so you have aaa, aa, a.  then you have instead of bbb by s&p,  in moody's you have baa, ba, b, ca, c, and so on.  now a lot of times almost always  agencies use symbols to further refine a given rating.  therefore s&p might add a plus or a minus sign to a rating.  for example, a single a+ rating is a shade higher or  a shade better than a single a rating.  and similarly, moody's a1 is actually a shade better than a single a,  or for that matter, moody's baa1 is a shade better than baa.  similarly, an a- is a shade lower than a single a.  so basically, s&p and  moody's use a plus or a minus sign to further refine the ratings.  so say, for instance, if a company has a single a plus rating,  that's a shade better than a single a rating.  similarly, if a company has a bbb+ rating, that's again better than a bbb rating.  similarly, if you have a company that is rated single  a- is a shade lower in terms of the safety of the principal and  interest compared to a bond which has a rating of single a.  now in both systems, rating groups from aaa through b carry the same meaning.  so s&p's aaa and moody's aaa have the same meaning.  so therefore,  moody's opinion of a aa bond is basically identical to s&p's opinion on a aa bond.  further, both systems clearly have boundary lines established  with the bbb and baa rating, which in the first category is  indicating some speculative investment characteristics.  so bonds above bbb- are believed to be safe investments, and  therefore are called investment grade.  while bonds below bbb-, that is bb+, bb and so on,  should basically receive a very careful analysis of  the risk because they're inherently more speculative  than bonds which have a rating of bbb- and above.  so baa ratings are more than, and  basically bond ratings are a lot more than just symbols, okay?  they are gauges of risk, and in the marketplace investors  almost always demand greater returns as risk increases.  therefore, the lower an issuer's rating,  the greater the annual interest payments that is demanded.  now since ratings can translate into millions of dollars of interest savings  for the corporation, rating agencies are understandably very careful and  thorough in pronouncing their opinions on default risk, which is what ratings are.  so each rating agency employs a staff of security analysts, who examine  the financial condition, the operations, and the management of a given issuer.  they also study specific documents such as the bond indenture,  which describes certain legal and technical details of the issue.  perhaps the most important factor is the evaluation of the company's  future earning potential.  now, in general, bond analysts test and  issue a strength under adverse market conditions with  an objective to determine the safety of the principal and interest payments.  so, therefore, after rating is given, it is typically reviewed periodically, and  is sometimes changed to reflect any improvement or  deterioration in an issuer's overall condition.  so, just to sum up, essentially,  as individual bond investors, we don't have the bandwidth or  the skill set to analyze the risk of default of each issuer,  be it a corporation or an agency or a municipality.  so therefore, the rating agencies do the job for us in trying to do an objective  assessment of the risk of the ious, which are what bond payments are all about.  so rating agencies make the job easier for investors to assess the risk.  and based on the risk assessment, typically if the bond is more risky,  i.e., has a lower rating, then the coupon on the bond is typically higher.  similarly, the most risk free bonds, which have a rating of,  say, aaa tend to have the lowest coupon.  be that for, and this is true globally not just in the us.  it's true for all countries in which bonds are issued and traded.  please note that most of the ratings are country specific,  so a aaa rating in a country like, say, india or  china is not necessarily directly comparable to a aaa rating in the us.  so, for instance, if the us treasury has rating of aaa, and  the indian government securities also has a aaa,  that doesn't necessarily mean that these two aaa are comparable.  so you normally have ratings assigned in a particular country.  and it's better to basically compare ratings in a given country and  definitely in a given currency than comparing it  across different countries and different currencies. 
[music]  learning goals, after watching this video,  you will be able to understand and explain industrial production and  capacity utilization and the effect industrial production and  capacity utilization data has on the stock markets,  bond markets, and currency markets.  industrial production and capacity utilization.  industrial production covers nearly everything  that is physically produced in the economy and includes the making of cars,  umbrellas, paper clips, medical equipment, steel, what have you.  it makes no difference whether these two goods are for domestic buyers,  foreign consumers, or get stocked as inventory.  all that matters is how much industry is actually churning out in the economy.  one reason why traders are so keen on following industrial production  is that it reacts fairly quickly to the ups and downs of the business cycle.  capacity utilization rate is a deceptively simple and incredibly important data.  market participants look at how much industries in the economy are presently  producing.  and then compare that output with what they can potentially produce  if the industrial sector was running at maximum capacity,  at the maximum possible capability.  this data is significant in three respects, at least three respects.  firstly, a nation's economic power is judged by its ability to produce goods  when they are needed.  it reflects the strength and flexibility of the industrial sector.  second, it is useful to know how under-utilized  manufacturers are in case more output is needed in the future.  third, the capacity utilization rate has some predictive value.  it's a good leading indicator of business investment spending and  can warn of building inflationary pressures.  industrial production is like a window into the industrial part of the world.  it differs from other economic indicators in one very important respect.  it actually measures the changes in the volume of goods produced,  that is industrial production doesn't take the price of these products into account.  so, there is no need to worry about the distorting effects of inflation.  so, that makes it a more purer measure of output so it corresponds more closely  to the performance of real or inflation adjusted gdp.  manufacturing activity is highly sensitive to changes in interest rates and demand so  it closely parallels shifts in the overall economy.  capacity utilization measures the amount of slack that is there in the economy.  so let me give you an example.  so let's understand this using a hypothetical example of a bike  making firm.  let's say that this firm has a capacity to manufacture 500 bicycles a month,  but is currently producing only 350.  so it's operating at a capacity utilization rate of just about 70%.  now let's assume that the rest of the bike industry is operating at  the same low level.  so you can produce 500 bicycles, but you're producing only 350.  so that's only 70% capacity utilization.  and if we assume that the bike industries operating at the same low level under such  circumstances getting spare parts i don't think should be a problem, right.  because there is likely to be a lot of extra bike tires,  brakes, etc., available from suppliers.  nor would there be reason to hire additional workers or  invest in new bike making machinery because there are not enough buyers  out there to purchase what can already be easily produced because  people are operating at 70% capacity utilization.  but all this will change when demand surges, and  the industry starts churning out bikes at close to 100% of its capacity,  i.e., it's operating very close to its maximum capacity.  if that feverish pace continues for an extended period of time,  bike manufacturers will begin to experience shortages in parts.  prices for bike components will rise.  as the cost of assembling bicycles accelerates,  shoppers will see their price tags go up as well.  they key lesson here is that as the industry gets closer to operating at  full capacity, shortages in resources emerge.  and this can generate inflation.  high capacity utilization rates can also lead to new investments in  factory equipments and planned expansions so  that companies can increase output in the future.  as you might guess, the capacity utilization rate for manufacturing  typically climbs when the economy is vibrant, and falls when demand softens.  so what effect does this data have on stock markets,  bond markets, and currency markets?  stocks, industrial production is not one of  those high profile indicators which are known to roil the equity markets.  strong production is generally considered to be supportive of stock prices because  it signifies more economic growth and better corporate profits.  the only concerns for stock investors is if higher production leads to  excessively tight capacity and higher prices.  should this scenario emerge,  stocks might react negatively to a jump in industrial output.  what effect does it have on bonds?  should industrial production and capacity utilization jump by a greater than  expected amount, this can prompt a sell off in the bond markets.  this is particularly the case if utilization rates climb about 80%,  a zone which can begin to drain resources,  can create bottlenecks, and definitely accelerate inflation.  on the flip side, slow production along with falling utilization rates  could raise bond prices and  lower interest rates because the threat of inflation would have subsided.  or the expectation that inflation would increase is much lower, and  therefore bond prices will increase.  currency, normally currency markets react modestly to industrial production.  foreigners try to assess how production and capacity utilization  will affect future inflation and interest rates in the economy.  because a jump in industrial output suggests faster economic growth,  it can increase foreign demand for domestic currency,  at the very least to prevent domestic currency from falling.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you will understand what short term,  high frequency trading means.  you'll also learn the guidelines that you should keep in mind when  executing a short term, high frequency trade.  >> short term trading in currency is unlike short term trading in  most other financial markets.  a short term trade in stocks or  commodities usually means hoarding of position for a day or sever days at least.  that's what a short term endows markets.  but the cost of liquidity and  narrow bid of a spread in currencies that we spoke about in early lectures.  prices are constantly fluctuating in small increments in the currency markets.  the steady and fluid price action in currencies allows for extremely short term  trading by speculators intent on capturing just a few pips on each trade.  shut down forex trading at the institutional level typically  in walls holding a position for only a few seconds or minutes,  and rarely longer than an.  but the time element is not the defining feature of short term currency trading.  instead the pip fluctuations are what is more important.  the traders who follow a short term trading style are seeking to  profit by repeatedly opening and closing positions after gaining just a few pips.  and these could be frequently as little as one or two pips.  but that's at the institutional level and  not at the retail level for people like you and me.  in the inter bank market extremely short term in and  out trading is referred to as jobbing the market.  currency also call it scalping.  i'll use the terms interchangeably.  traders who follow this style have to be among the fastest and  most disciplined of traders because they're out to capture  the only a few pips on each trade.  in terms of speed, rapid reaction and instantaneous  decision-making are essential to successfully jobbing the market.  when it comes to discipline, scalpers  must be absolutely ruthless both in taking profits and losses.  if you are in it to make only a few pibs on each trade  you can't afford to lose much more than a few pips on each trade.  so jobbing the market requires an intuitive feel for the market.  some traders refer to as do as rhythm trading.  scalpers don't worry about the fundamentals too much.  if you were to ask a scalper for her opinion of a particular currency pair.  she would be likely to respond along the lines of it feels bid or it feels offered.  meaning she senses an underlying buying or selling bias in the market.  but only at that particular moment.  if you were to ask her again a few minutes later,  she may respond in the opposite direction.  successful scalpers,  good scalpers have absolutely no allegiance to any single position.  they couldn't care less if they couldn't care two hoots for  if the currency pair is going up or down.  this strictly focused on the next few tips, the position is either looking for  them or they are a bit faster than you can blink an eyelid.  all they need is essentially volatility and liquidity.  retail traders, retail investors like you and  me have typically are faced with a much wider of spread.  and that could be as large, as anywhere between two and five pips.  although this makes jobbing slightly more difficult, it doesn't mean  that if you're an original investor, you can't engage in short term trading.  it just means that you will need to adjust the risk parameters  of the style adequately.  instead of looking to make one or  two pips on each trade as an institutional trader does.  you need to aim for  a pip gain at least as large as the spread you're dealing with in each currency pair.  you need to basically make more than two to five pips.  that's the spread that you're paying.  the other basic rule of taking only minimal risk and  not hanging onto a position for too long still applies for investors also.  i'll share with you some important guidelines to keep in mind  when following a shark dome trigging strategy in the effects market.  if you're looking to trade the effects market,  trade only the most liquid currency pairs just, so  euro/usd, usd/jpy, that's dollar yen, euro cable,  that is eur/gbp, euro yen, and euro suisse, chf.  the most liquid pairs have the tightest trading spreads and  fewer sudden price jumps.  i'd also suggest that you trade only during times of peak liquidity and  market interest.  consistent liquidity and  fluid market interest are essential to short term trading strategies.  market liquidity is deepest during the european session, when asian and  north american trading centers overlap with european time zones.  that's about 2:00 am to noon eastern time.  trading and other sessions can leave you with far fewer and  less predictable short term price movements to take advantage of.  i would suggest that you focus your trading on only one pair at a time.  if you're aiming to capture second by second, or  minute by minute price movements.  you basically need to fully concentrate on that one single pair at the point in time.  it also improve your fee for the pair that pair is all that you're watching  as you present your default date size, so  that you don't have to keep specifying it on each deal.  look for a brokerage firm that offers fast trading.  so that you're not subject to insignificant deals or equals.  adjust your risk and reward expectations to reflect the dealings spent off  the cost to pay your training.  with two to five pips spread on most major pass.  you probably need to capture three to ten pips to trade,  to off sets loses if the market moves against you.  i would suggest i would strongly suggest that you avoid  trading during data releases.  in my experience as a trader at jp morgan, i have found that getting a short term  position into a data release is extremely risky because prices can  gap sharply after the release, blowing a short term strategy out of the water.  markets are also prone to quick price adjustments in that 15 to 30 minute  window ahead of a major release as nearby orders get triggered.  this can lead to a quick shift against your position  that may not be resolved before the data comes out.  so these are some of the guidelines and  suggestions that i have for short term trading strategies.  in the next lecture, we look at medium term trading strategies,  which are basically also called as directional trading strategies.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you will know what stock market tickers are.  you will understand the financial information of  a company as is given in a financial newspaper.  you will understand terms like volume, beta, eps, etcetera.  now, that we have covered the basics.  it's time to put this knowledge to work and  actually understand the financial information  that appears in online websites and in financial newspapers.  so, we will basically talk a little bit about, how to look up a ticker symbol.  how to essentially understand the numbers that you actually  get in a financial newspaper, like the wall street journal.  or if you were to open up, let's say a google finance or a yahoo finance.  there is a plethora of information that actually comes with each stock.  and we'll actually try to understand those numbers.  so stock exchanges assign each individual stock  a unique ticker symbol for identification purposes.  you usually have to kind of know the ticker symbol  when you're trying to research the stock, or  trying to get quotes on the stock, or if you're placing trade orders.  the term stock ticker refers to, it's a pretty obsolete terminology,  old terminology.  it refers to the now, obsolete telegraph machine.  which printed really abbreviated,  a company symbols and prices on paper tape.  this was used long, long back.  it used to be used way back in the 1870s to i think 1970s.  by the way, discarded ticker tapes were often used in fact,  thrown out of windows on the wall street, as confetti during parades.  and those such events became known as ticker tape parades, by the way.  today, the old scrolling paper tickers are recalled,  and they've been replaced by electronic display boards, and  display crawls as they're called on financial tv channels and websites.  stock ticker symbols are usually one to five letters long, and  occasionally contain a period or hyphen to designate a different class of shares.  some of the oldest and the biggest companies have just one letter or  single-letter stock symbols like say, c for citicorp,  s for sprint, f for ford motors,  t for at&t, h for hyatt hotels, and so on.  so some ticker symbols in fact,  some ticker symbols have a way good sense of humor as well.  like for instance, you have a ticker symbol called luv,  which is for south west airlines.  and you have a ticker symbol called yum, which is for actually yum brands.  yum brands incidentally, if you haven't heard this name,  owns kfc, owns taco bell, owns pizza hut.  because all of them are owned by yum brands.  and the ticker symbol for that is yum.  if you know the company and their ticker symbol, that you want to buy.  you can obtain its current price and status online.  for instance, if you'd rather type luv into the text field on say,  the google finance page or the yahoo finance page.  you'll get something like the picture that showed on the screen for you.  here, you have some brief explanations, so i'll give you some numbers out there.  and i'll give you some really brief explanation on those numbers.  one of the things that is often cited in these online websites is  what is called as today's open or just the open.  the first price at which the stock gets traded is basically called as the open  price.  this the price when the market opened up this morning.  in the screens for south west airlines, that was $44.76.  please note that stocks do not  open at the same price that they closed at the day before.  so you also have fields like previous day's close.  this number is the price of the stock for  the last trade of the previous business day.  you also have fields like today's change.  that is basically the change in price which you can see on  the screen is a minus 45 cents or minus 0.45.  you also find the percentage change which in this case is a minus 1.01.  now that's basically the percentage change compared to yesterday's closing price.  you also have fields like volume,  this indicates the number of shares that have been traded today.  some stocks may trade millions of shares each day and others only trade a few,  sometimes a few hundreds or even zero shares per day.  if there's no trading that's going on, you have zero shares per day.  there are other fields like last price.  this is the most recent price the stock has been traded at.  you typically would find, on  online trading platforms you would find bid-ask as we described earlier.  bid is essentially the highest price a buyer is currently willing to pay for  a stock, while the ask is the lowest price at which a seller is  currently willing to sell.  it is also called as the offer.  the size is the number of shares for the bid or the ask price.  you'll also have fields like 52-week high-lows.  this is the highest and the lowest price the stock has stayed at  during the last 52 weeks which is essentially a year, and  that allows you to compare the current price to it's 52-week range.  also online stock quote listing which includes essentially,  you'll find things like stock charts, which come in a lot of different formats.  they all track up, basically what they track is they track pricing data such as  open, high, low and close which is also called ohlc.  they also come with, usually come with a lot of display options such as  you can display them as line charts, as bar charts, as candle sticks.  you can also select data ranges and  you also have the ability to overlay one information on the other.  like for instance, you may want to overlay volume on top of moving averages and  dozens of other indicators that you should be available.  another field that is very commonly seen and is quite noticed and  is noticed with a lot of, is given a lot of attention is the annual dividends.  dividends are cash payments that some companies make  as a way of returning profits to the shareholders.  if you own enough stocks,  you actually can make a wonderful income just from your stock dividends.  you also have fields like, annual dividend yield.  this is an important measure of the returns of the stock.  and the way it's calculated is,  basically, the annual dividend amount divided by the current stock price.  so for example, if the stock is at $10 and the company pays out a cash dividend of,  say, 50 cents, then the annual dividend yield is 5%.  .50 divided by 10.  on the field that is given a lot of attention is the eps,  the company's earnings per share.  you can also think of it as profits per share.  it's calculated by dividing the company's most recent annual income  by the number of shares outstanding.  one other field that is usually displayed as what is called as the beta.  it's also written using it's namesake greek letter, beta.  so beta is essentially a measure of the volatility  of stock compared to the market as a whole.  a beta of one means that it moves with the market.  greater than one means that the stock fluctuates more quickly in general.  a beta of between zero and one means that the stock moves,  in general, less often than the market.  a negative beta means that the stock generally moves in the opposite  direction to the market.  so these are some of the the feeds that you would actually see when you open  a financial newspaper, or if you were to visit google finance or yahoo finance.  or for that matter any of the trading online platforms that are there.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes, after watching this video you'll be  able to explain the meaning of the yield curve.  you will be able to differentiate between different types of yield curves and  you will also be able to predict the moments of the stock markets,  bond markets and currency markets to the changes in yield curve.  yield curve, when it comes to predicting the future course of the economy, one  indicator which stands above all others in terms of accuracy is the yield curve.  no other measurement has demonstrated as much success in warning of upcoming  turning points in business activity as the yield curve has done in the past.  the yield curve is a collection of yields plotted on a graph  that covers the entire spectrum of maturities on the sovereign bonds.  what distinguishes the yield curve from all other economic indicators is that,  historically at least,  it's not something that has been produced by a government agency or a private group.  instead, it is shaped by the financial markets, and  is supposed to reflect the collective wisdom of investors  at any moment in time on the likely direction of the economy and inflation.  traditionally the central bank relies on controlling short term interest rates as  a way to keep the economy and employment growing, while holding inflation in check.  longer term rates, in most economies,  are left to the private capital markets to shape.  the yield curve cannot be ignored because it does influence the cost of funds for  individuals, companies, and even the government.  the yield curve is such an important tool for traders,  because its shape tells you where the economy is heading.  the yield curve gradually can either slope up, it can slope up gradually,  or steeply or it can appear totally flat, or be completely inverted.  in a normal yield curve the yield starts off pretty low on short term maturities,  and then gradually rises as the duration of securities lengthen.  now why is this considered normal?  because in a typical economic expansion,  investors demand a higher rate of return on longer maturing debt.  why is this considered normal?  because in a typical economic expansion,  investors demand a higher rate of return on longer maturing debt.  after all, if i decide to purchase a 10-year or  a 30-year bond, i would want extra compensation, in form of higher yield for  all the unknown risks that i'm going to face over the coming years.  now, these risks could include inflation strings,  could include political turmoil, and even war.  in contrast, if i am buying short-term debt, i have far less risks  to worry about, and therefore, i might be willing to accept the lower yield.  it's much easier to foresee what might happen in the next few months  than to predict conditions two or three decades from now.  so in a normal yield curve, you will typically expect  interest rates to increase as maturities extend.  a normal yield curve is upward sloping  because if you're buying a bond which has a maturity of say ten years,  you would expect a higher return than a bond which has only 12 months maturity.  so you would expect a normal yield curve to increase,  you would expect a normal yield curve to slope up.  you could also have a yield curve which is just steeply upwards sloping,  a steep yield curve is just an extreme version of a normal yield curve.  with yields climbing to higher levels much more rapidly than on a normal curve.  now this can occur when the economy is starting to pick up speed causing fresh  anxieties that inflation can become more problematic in the near future.  such worries might provoke investors into selling long term bonds.  especially if they believe that the central bank  is moving too slowly to contain emerging price pressures.  now this will depress bond prices and drive long term yields higher.  on the other hand, if central bank is perceived to be acting quickly to prevent  an outbreak of inflation.  investors could actually rush in to buy long term bonds to lock in high yields,  while bond prices are still relatively cheap.  now, in that case, a steep yield curve will not materialize.  you can see how timely central bank's intervention, or lack of it,  can greatly influence yields across the entire range of bond maturities.  a flat yield curve exists when both short term and  long term securities provide nearly identical yields.  it's a first major shot across the bow, if you would like, to warn  that the economy is in trouble and maybe in danger of slipping into recession.  a scenario that markedly lessens the risk of inflation.  traders often buy bonds in such circumstances to capture higher  longer term yields, the result of that bond prices appreciate and  yields move down closer to short term rates.  an inverted yield curve, in which short term rates are materially higher  than long term rates, is the silent call that a recession is in the offing.  it reflects the view that the central bank is keeping short term rates too high,  with money getting scarce and that an economic downturn is a virtual certainty.  now how does the yield curve affect stocks bonds and currencies?  stocks, stock prices are based on expectations  of future corporate earnings and overall business activity both  of which can be foreseen by the behavior of the yield curve.  so if the yield curve is upward sloping,  typically it means good news for stock markets.  if the yield curve is flat or inverted, that normally bodes  not too well for stock markets because that indicates an upcoming recession.  and therefore stock markets will not react very positively  when the yield curve goes from a normal curve, to a flat, and then gets inverted.  bonds, expectations of future growth and inflation by fixed income traders, yet  determine which debt maturities are the most attractive to buy.  and now that such preferences help shape the yield curve.  however, since the outlook for economic activity and  price behavior can change the yield curve  is constantly in a state of motion.  currencies, now foreign investors reaction to a flat or  inverted yield curve is difficult to predict.  much depends on the magnitude of the inversion, how much inverted the yield  curve is, which is how much short term rates are above long term rates.  and how short term rates stack up against those of other countries.  it's possible that active foreign traders might choose to avoid investing in  economies because the yield curve is flat, or inverted,  because it's normally a harbinger of economy growth, if not recession.  sometimes, it could be a harbinger for a recession as well.  but that will cause the currency to depreciate in foreign exchange markets.  however, if the yield curve is so inverted that short term rates are markedly  higher than those of other nations, it can attract an influx of what is called  as hot money from overseas as foreign investors seek to take advantage  of the greater returns they can receive here in the short term.  now what do i mean by hot money?  it's a fast moving money from investors around the world who are constantly on  the hunt for highest possible short term gains.  the instant an investment loses it's appeal,  for example, when domestic yields fall relative to their foreign counterparts.  that hot money quickly leaves the borders of one country for  another lucrative region around the world.  therefore, currencies might bounce up in values when  there is an inverted yield curve, but its strength would be very tenuous.  a steep yield curve suggests stronger economic growth and  rising short term rates in the months ahead.  this will likely attract foreign investors to purchase and  hold the domestic currency.  [music] 
[music]  >> learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you will understand the investment styles of  legendary investors such as warren buffet and peter lynch.  you'll also be able to understand how to invest according to your own strengths.  [inaudible] knowledge with so many stocks out there,  what should you as an investor buy?  now you could spend thousands of hours reading up all the newspapers  in the world, all the web sites, all the financial blogs,  all the discussion boards and newsletters out there.  and there are a lot of them that seemingly cover just about  every single one of the tens of thousands of stocks on the nyse, amex and  nasdaq, but i can assure you that you're going to learn precious little and  the only thing that's going to go up is your headache quotient.  so i would suggest for people who,  especially are beginning to start trading and investing.  and if you're learning to invest through this coursera course,  i would typically suggest to keep it or to follow what is called as a kiss approach.  keep it smart and simple and i think that's the best way to start.  so you should basically be asking yourself, what field am i an expert in?  am i a doctor?  if let's say, you are a doctor, if so you should be asking,  what's the new drug or the equipment maker all the pharmaceutical company?  that is essentially extremely exciting and looks promising by your teacher.  and so do you know what books or education services are product of  education softwares that your school is buying or you call this buying?  if you will go to a grocery store, for instance, you see people  suddenly asking for a new product that you can't seem to keep on the shelves.  if you're a parent, are your kids constantly asking for  a certain brand of shoes, clothes, games or gadgets?  so, investing in what you know base on how much you know  can provide a good return and a high-level of comfort.  i will share with you a couple of legendary investors, the first one and  their experiences with investing.  the first one is warren buffet.  warren buffet amassed his fortune without using a very wide variety of  exotic strategies.  he is basically what you call as a classic buy and hold investor who studies  companies and determines their full values based on the products they make and  the products they sell and looks at the companies profitability,  management quality and predictions of the future growth and sustainability.  buffet never acts on rumors or pure market price indicators and  that's a very good strategy to follow.  and surprisingly for someone recognized as one of the preeminent  investment gurus on our planet, he invests really really long-term.  the other investor whom you want to look up to, which all the investment community  looks up to is somebody whom i've met and  have had a chat in person this legendary investor called peter lynch.  so peter lynch is another globally respected investment genius's,  if you would like.  he embodies a solid, but not really exotic investment strategy.  it's quite a simple strategy, if you want to determine that way.  so, his story is that after graduating from boston school way back in 1965.  lynch was hired, as an intern at the company that came to be forever  linked with his name fidelity investments.  this was mostly, because he caddied for  fidelity's president at a local country club.  he went from such humble backgrounds and such humble beginnings.  he began financial career.  among his many accolades, lynch is noted for a very important and  simple theory, which is that invest in what you know.  in one of his books and i can't remember which one,  because he's written quite a few, might have written seven or eight of them.  but in one of his books, he essentially talks about  spending every saturday with his daughters when he would  inevitably ask them or maybe the daughters asked them.  daddy, take us to gap, so that we can buy some clothes.  so reluctantly, mr. lynch would every saturday give  his daughters hundre dollars to shop and sat out in the mall just waiting.  so after a few weekends of this routine, his eyes suddenly lit up.  he noticed that all the teens are dragging their parents to the gap store and  he sat outside, and counted the number of people going through the checkout lines.  after an observing and guessing at the average of what's spent,  he had up a ready or decent estimate or  maybe a rough estimate of how much the store was making.  he started liking the gap store and inside of the company and  had his stuff resource the company the following monday.  so it was in his portfolio and became one of his best buys ever  returning more than 1000%, that's ten times.  i turned it over for 1,000 persons during the 1980s.  so investing in what you know is a very good strategy and  it's not just an excellent starting strategy, an excellent starting point,  but it can also be a very good enduring strategy rather than trying to become  an expert on really complex investments strategy's over night and  trying to expand your local knowledge.  you might want to use your personal life and work experience,  your industrial experience to choose securities of companies and  industries you're really familiar with.  think about your goal as building a portfolio of non-losers,  as opposed to a group of winners.  if you combine non-losers with investing in companies and  securities that you know, it often leads you to undervalued stocks and  really true bargains that maximize your investment dollars and  we also want to find one or more of those ten baggers.  award famous linked messages called, as i would like to call it.  i mean, those baseball fans, you know that in baseball,  bags is a popular term for the bases.  finding a ten-bagger, which is basically hitting two home runs and a double.  means that you found a stock, a ten-bagger, basically,  means that you found a stock that returned ten times of your original purchase price,  which is what lynch did with gap.  he got more than ten times return with gap store way back in the 1980s.  so i mean, even if you are not so successful, but  if you find a group of two or four baggers,  that should make your portfolio extremely happy.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you will be able to understand and  explain inflation as measured by consumer price index.  you will also be able to predict the movements in stock markets,  bond markets and currency markets in response to the inflation data.  consumer price index.  cpi. what is it?  it's the most popular measure of price inflation in dealing goods and services.  along with the employment report,  the consumer price index is one of those red hot economic indicators  that is carefully dissected by financial market participants.  it's fairly obvious why it gets so much attention, inflation touches everybody.  determines how much consumers like us pay for goods and services.  it affects the cost of doing business.  it creates havoc with personal and corporate investments.  and therefore influences the quality off life for all of us.  moreover, the outlook for  inflation helps set labor contracts and government physical policy.  landlords take inflation forecasts into account  to lock in future hikes in rental contracts.  judges even refer to the cpi to compute alimony and child support payments.  in short the effective inflation is all purposive, no one can escape it's reach.  more than half of cpi consists of services, which is for  most economies the fastest growing part of the economy.  this makes cpi more relevant to consumers and workers.  on the surface,  the physical process of tracking prices looks fairly straight forward.  however, in the real world, it's not that easy.  sometimes data collectors in the field have to use their own judgement  to determine whether the price of a particular item has gone up or down.  even if that product's price hasn't changed at all.  now how could this be?  the reason is that a change in packaging can alter a product's effective price.  let's see this with an example.  suppose you buy a bottle of detergent that costed you five dollars last month,  let's say that the company that makes the detergent wants to attract more buyers and  decides to add 25% more content to each bottle without changing the price.  now you're getting 25% more detergent for the same five dollars.  government staffers who are computing cpi  will correctly view this as a drop in inflation and record the effective price  as falling from five dollars last month to four dollars this month.  after all you're getting more for  each dollar spent on detergent because the quantity has increased by 25%.  here's another example and  something that might be irksome to consumers like you and me.  lets say i went shopping last month and bought a bag of potato chips for  say four dollars.  this month i noticed that while the packaging and price hasn't changed,  i'm surprised and probably upset that the new bag holds 20% less than last month.  though i'm still paying four dollars for that bag.  the government will classify it as a price increase to five dollars  an increase of 25%, because the amount of potato chips in that bag has gone down.  so in this instance, i'm receiving less for each dollar spent.  there is other kind of problem that data collectors run into  because data collectors are trying to gauge the cost of living.  that's because not everybody pursues the same lifestyle.  so the best the cpi can do is measure the average change in retail prices  overtime for a basket of assorted goods and services that people typically use,  because not everybody uses the same basket of goods and services.  the weights of these assorted good and services under the mind by surveying  1,000s families and individuals about what they actually bought.  and every couple of years these weights get revised,  rebalanced to adjust for peoples changing tastes and priorities.  to reduce some of the statistical noise in the inflation data and  to provide a better understanding of the genuine trend inflation,  the garmin publishes an index known as the core cpi.  which is the cpi without the unstable components of food and energy.  the most volatile products in terms of price change is food and energy.  so, most financial market participants see core cpi  as the best measure of the underlying inflation rate.  now how does inflation affect stock markets?  equity investors hate sharp increases in cpi.  that's because it leads to higher bond rates, inflation increases,  interest rates increases, which raises the cost of their own corporate borrowing.  although revenues and perhaps even profits might jump in an inflationary environment  that kind of income is worth much less to share holders who prefer to see  earnings improve from greater sales volume and not price hikes.  further more, the threat of inflation will almost certainly force the central bank  to jump in and raise interest rates, which is also added the marr to shareholders.  now in contrast if inflation is dormant it will keep interest rates from rising and  lift strong prices.  investors usually place a high value  on the stream of future earnings at such times when inflation is not high,  because it stems from greater sale and higher production activity.  what effect does inflation data have on bonds?  an unexpected jump in cpi can slash bond values and propel yields higher.  bond losses are more likely to be even worse, if cpi surges because it  represents a deterioration in the underlying rate of inflation.  conversely, a benign cpi report, might show little or  no inflation, is bullish for fixed income securities  with bond prices generally rising and interest rates easing out.  what effect does inflation data have on currencies?  the effect of inflation on currency is less clear.  as is often the case in a healthy economy, especially if the economy is expanding,  rising interest rates can make the domestic currency attractive.  but if rates surge, primarily on account of growing inflation concerns,  it can hurt the domestic currency.  high inflation,  it lowers the value of domestic currency, which are held by foreigners.  so, sustained decrease in cpi can have a negative influence  nn the domestic currency.  having said that, do bear in mind that domestic currency traders are also  sensitive to other nuances.  for instance, if the players in the foreign exchange market believe that  central bank has moved quickly and deftly to smother inflation pressures,  it's unlikely that the currency will depreciate or, in other words,  it's likely that the domestic currency will hold it's ground or  even appreciate in value.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching the video you will understand what medium term directional  trading means.  you'll also understand the different approaches followed by  medium term traders.  in this lecture, we look at medium term directional trading and  long term trading based on macro economic views.  first, medium term trading.  medium term positions are typically held for periods ranging anywhere from  a few minutes to a few hours but usually not much longer than a day.  just as with short term trading, the key distinction for  medium term trading is not the length of the time the position is open but  the amount of pips you are seeking or perhaps risking.  where short term trading looks to profit from the routine noise of minor price  fluctuations almost without regard for the overall direction of the markets.  medium term trading seeks to get the overall direction right and  profit from more significant currency rate moves.  almost as many currency speculators fall into the medium term category,  which is sometimes also refered to as momentum trading or  swing trading as they fall into the short term trading category.  medium term trading requires many of the same skills as short term trading does,  especially when it comes to entering and exiting positions.  it also demands a broader perspective and a greater analytical effort,  and a lot more patience, because you're looking at a longer time horizon.  capturing intra-day price moves for maximum effect, essentially,  what you're trying to do, in the sense of medium term trading is essentially  determining where a currency pair is likely to go over the next several  hours or days and trying to construct a trading strategy to exploit that view.  medium term traders typically pursue one of the following over all approaches with  plenty of room to combine strategies.  firstly they are mostly trading a view.  which is having a directional based opinion  on which way a currency pair is likely to move.  so view traders are typically based on prevailing market teams like  inter-trade expectations or economic growth trends.  there are also people who trade the technicals,  they base their market outlook on chart patterns,  trend lines, support and resistant levels, momentum studies, and so on.  so technical traders typically spot a trade opportunity on the charts,  but they still need to be aware of fundamental events.  because the fundamental events are the catalysts for  many breaks of technical levels.  there are traders who trade events and data.  so they essentially base positions on expected outcomes of events like, say,  the central bank rate decision or a g7 meeting or, say, individual data reports.  even data traders typically open positions well in advance of events and  close them when the outcome is known.  there are also people who trade with the flow.  so trading based on overall market direction or trend or  information of major buying and selling which eventually flows, so  flow traders tend to stay out of short term range bond markets and  jump in only when a market move is under way.  so it's a little difficult to know when is a trend not a trend, and  when is it a range.  a trading range or a range bound market is a market that  remains confined within a relatively narrow range of prices.  in currency pairs a short-term, which is over the next few hours,  trading range may be between 20 to 50 pips wide.  while a longer term, which is basically over the next few days to weeks,  range can be 200 to 400 pips wide.  for all the hype that trends get in various market literature,  the actual reality is that most markets trend no more than a third of the time.  the rest of the time, they are bouncing around in ranges,  consolidating and trading sideways.  although medium term traders are normally looking to capture larger,  relative price moments, say 50 to 100 pips or more,  they're also quick to take smaller profits on the basis of short term price behavior.  for instance if a break of resistance levels suggests a targeted  price move of say 80 pips higher to the next resistance level,  the medium term trader is going to be more than happy capturing 70% or  say 90% or 85% of the expected price move.  they're not going to hold onto the position looking for  the exact price target to be hit.  finally, long term traders who basically trade based on macroeconomic data,  it's called long term macroeconomic trading.  long term trading in currencies is generally reserved for hedge funds,  and other institutional types with extremely deep pocket.  mostly for institutions.  long term trading in currencies can involve holding positions for weeks,  months, and even potentially years at a time.  holding positions for that long  necessarily involves being exposed to significant short term volatility.  even sometimes medium term volatility that can quickly overwhelm  margin trading accounts, which retail investors are not very comfortable with.  institutional investors, with proper risk management, are able to do that.  even individual margin traders,  with good risk management, can seek to capture long term trends.  the key is to hold a small enough position relative to your margin balance  that it can withstand volatility of as much as 5% or more.  so that's basically about medium term trading and long term trading.  mostly long term training is done by institutions,  but there is nothing stopping you or me as a retail investor,  to engage in long term macro-economic trading on currency markets.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes, after watching this video you will be able to explain and  understand monetary policy.  you will also be able to predict the movements of the stock markets,  bond markets and currency markets to the monetary policy done by the central bank.  one event that catches the attention of  the investor community is monetary policy that's announced by the central bank  why is monetary policy such a widely followed event in the investor community?  well, but before that let's take a step back and  first understand what monetary policy really is.  in its very simplistic form, monetary policy is the process by which  monetary authority of a country controls the supply of money.  it does this by targeting the interest rate at which money is borrowed and  lent, interest rates are basically the cost of lending money.  actually, they are the prices you pay or someone pays you to lend money for  a specified period of time.  for example, when you open a savings account, or you invest in a time deposit.  the bank is borrowing your money and paying you rent for using your money.  it then perhaps, rents that money to others and maybe charging a higher rental  on that, and makes a profit by using this interest rate differential.  you probably have noticed that the rental cost of money or  interest rates keep changing.  you probably may have noticed that the rental cost of money or  interest rates change.  so why do interest rates change?  an important reason is inflation, so when inflation is high or  expected to be high, lenders know that they will eventually be paid back  with money that is worth much less than the ones they rented out.  so they insist on a high interest rate to compensate them for  the losses of their money's purchasing power.  but interest rates can move up or  down even if inflation expectations remain constant.  that's because, when economy is coming along well, businesses can find  opportunities to profitably use the money they borrow from you or  a bank and are willing to pay a higher rent for it.  so the institutions that sets monetary policy,  throughout the economy and therefore such industries is the central bank.  for instance the federal reserve in the us or bank of japan in japan.  when the central bank feels that the economy is expanding far to fast, and  that inflation my result it tries to cool things down  by pushing up interest rates high enough that business and  individuals like you and me wouldn't want to borrow so much money.  in contrast, when the economy's contracting the central bank pushes rates  down, to stimulate borrowing and spending in hopes of boosting the entire economy.  so interest rate is a lever or monetary policy tool, that the central bank  uses to promote economic growth and price stability or inflation.  our typical monetary policy is either referred to as being expansionary or  contractionary.  and increasing money supply in the economy more rapidly than usual is called  expansionary monetary policy, while increasing money supply in the economy  less rapidly than usual or even a shrinkage is called contractionary.  so in effect a monetary policy is like a reward in the hands of a central bank.  when it pulls it up or down it increases or  reduces interests rates, which thereby impacts the money supply in the economy.  so how does monetary policy affects stocks prices, bond prices and currencies?  expansioning monetary policy is when the central bank uses this tool to  stimulate the economy.  this leave her to stimulate the economy, so that increases the money supply,  lowers interest rates, and increases aggregate demand.  when businesses can't borrow at modifiable bid rates, and  companies can therefore expand to keep up with consumer demand and  do more investments and capital expenditure.  so the ultimately higher more workers who's income rise,  allowing them to shop even more.  that's normally good enough to stimulate demand and  drive economic growth therefore, an expansionary monetary policy  tends to have a positive effect on stocks and currencies.  industry changes also have a predictable income on boards,  which are essentially money lending vehicles.  interest rates glide more prices down and falling rates drive them up.  on the other hand, contractionary monetary policies are policies used by monetary  authorities to contract the money supply and  reduce economic activity by raising interest rates to slow down  the rate of borrowing by companies in individuals and banks.  contractionary monetary policy typically tends to reduce stock prices,  bond prices, and has a negative impact on currencies.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video,  you will know the importance of having a trading strategy.  you'll also be able to use the generally accepted trading rules  to build your portfolio.  now that you own the stock, what should you do with it?  if your stock just made a profit, you're probably basking in  your own brilliance and kicking yourself for not buying more.  if you already lost money, you might be simply kicking yourself period.  it's natural so don't worry, here's what you should do next,  either you made money or lost money.  selling a stock is just as important as an investment decision to buy.  both selling and buying are equally important and  you must have a strategy to maximize your profits and minimize your losses.  developing a good trading strategy is extremely important.  just having a strategy is important, even if it is a flawed strategy.  it's actually okay to have a flawed strategy  than not having any strategy at all.  that's because a strategy will always evolve as you learn from your past  successes and mistakes as markets change and during this when your style changes.  in this lecture, we'll essentially discuss some generally accepted trading rules.  since trading is part science and part art,  essentially, i would think you should create some rules of your own.  you will actually create a lot of your own rules as you grow and  learn but these are some of these rules that are used by very experienced  investment institutional traders who have done this for a very long time.  rule number one is to ride your winners, cut your losses.  when you learn any new skill,  there are some helpful rules of thumb,  which help you to make rapid progress.  say, for instance, in golf,  one of the things that is said is that you must keep your left arm straight,  that is if you're a righty, then you should keep your left arm straight.  in blackjack, you must assume that the dealer has a ten.  so that's some simple thumb rules.  in stock trading, the first rule is ride your winners and cut your losers.  that sounds simple but almost all investors i have known  shared a common affliction that causes them to do the exact opposite.  i've known a lot of traders in my investment banking career and  a lot of them have this affliction of doing exactly the opposite.  they can't admit that they're actually wrong and that was true for me, as well.  let's take an example, so let's assume you  have $1,000 invested in two companies and you have two trades.  let's say these are your first two trades.  after the first month, let's say the first stock, let's call it stock a,  the market value has increased from 1,000 to 1,200,  while stock b's value has gone from 1,000 to say 800.  now, what is your first reaction?  is your first thought to tell the winning stock a and take your profit and  wait until your loser stock b regains it's value from 800 to 1,000?  if that's what you're thinking, then i'm sorry to say it's  actually a loser's mentality, at least, that's what traders call it.  but that's the typical game plan  that usually comes first and is followed by a lot of naive investors.  the problem is that our investor has [cough]  actually has gotten emotional about his choice of stock b and  he probably thinks that it'll come back soon from 800,  it'll come back to 1,000 and sell it when i can get all of my money back.  the rule is that, don't do this.  ride your winners and cut your losers.  what that does is it essentially cuts your losses and  everybody has losses, you'll also have some losses, everybody does.  if your winner is a hot stock,  it's likely that its market value will increase further.  similarly, if your problem child, that is stock b, that price is declining,  the declines will probably continue causing you to suffer even more losses.  which brings us to rule 2.  rule 2 is, don't fall in love with your stock purchases, particularly losers.  do know that you are not a welfare agency or  rehab specialist or a sea rescue pilot or an air rescue pilot or any of that kind.  you're not here for charity.  if an investment is going south, sell it without remorse and move on.  it's at the end of the day, it's stock, it's not people.  don't forget that you're investing essentially to make money and  it's not a hobby or a charity and admitting that.  i have done this to myself, if i admit that i was wrong in buying certain stocks,  i've traded more currencies and options than stocks.  but if lets say, i've bought stocks for my own personal portfolio and  it's sometimes difficult to admit that i made a mistake in investing.  all traders have this problem, because it makes every  investor feel bad when they see the portfolio is losing money,  which paradoxically makes it even more difficult to sell it off.  the reason why most investors fail  is due to their feelings about the stock that they buy and sell.  they get emotionally attached and they don't let their minds take the decisions.  one of the ground rules that i use is that i don't let my ego get in the way  of making money or in the case of a losing trade,  basically, i don't let my ego stop the trade from bleeding.  if you can master your ego and your emotions, you'll have a very profitable  investment experience and you'll have more profits on your winning trades and  smaller losses on your losing trades guaranteed.  rule number 3, is never, ever lose  more than 10% on any single trade.  finance professors like me, and also ex-traders like me,  and even common sense, they all tell you that you should never let one bad apple  ruin the others in your basket.  picking nine stocks that gain 10%, which is 90% total,  will be a waste of time if your tenth stock loses 100%.  don't let this happen to you.  the easiest way to follow this rule is to place  stop loss order on your stocks as soon as you buy them.  let's say if you buy ibm at say $100 a share,  then immediately place a stop loss order at 90.  this way, you won't have to worry about a market crash erasing more than 10% of  your portfolio value in any given day recall here.  rule number 4 is essentially, diversify, diversify, diversify.  always diversify your portfolio into, at least, ten stocks.  it doesn't matter if you're starting with $10,000 or  $100,000, you'll have more success if you think really big, and  proceed as though you were a major league investor.  diversification is important because while one sector of the economy might be  falling, let's say it falls 10%,  rarely does the whole market sell off 10% in the same period.  it doesn't happen very often.  with a properly diversified portfolio, you may actually get stomped out  on one or two stocks but hopefully, you will have gains in others.  as i said, remember rule number one, ride your winners.  let's say you have ten stocks, one or two get stomped out, and  of the eight, let's say, one or two are basically winners.  they're really basically making you good money,  then the portfolio as a whole will be much more positive and  the risk in the portfolio would be a lot lower.  >> [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you'll be able to use  a lot of trading rules to build your portfolio and how to use them effectively.  so we continue with the trading rules.  we discussed rule number one to four in the previous lecture.  so now let's go on to rule number five.  rule number five essentially says that you shouldn't fall in love with any  particular stock, and more importantly, watch for market tops.  avoiding falling in love with any one particular stock as  the market can turn on it very quickly.  so it's not a very good idea to fall in love with any particular stock.  now, while you may love a particular stock,  millions of others may actually develop a dislike at a moment's notice.  there's some bad news that comes and people are shorting it.  so you must be prepared to cut ties with an investment as and  when this condition emerges or starts to emerge.  so as i said earlier, your possible first reaction is to sell the winner and  keep the loser, which we said is the wrong one.  remember, your winners deliver profits on paper but  your loses involve real money you've already invested.  so it's critical that you cut or  at least minimize your losses to safeguard your overall portfolio value.  for this reason you should develop effective exit strategies.  now, so basically this brings us to the only exception to rule number one,  which is that market tops.  as you become more experienced you'll have a gut feel or you'll get a feel for  those times when one of your winners is at a market top.  as you watch stocks day in, day out, day after day, month after month,  you will get a feel when a stock has gone too far ahead, probably too fast,  it's gone too far too fast, and has got to come back, at least down a bit.  now this is the time to consider just selling your winners or  tightening up your stop-loss order from say 10% to 4%,  so that you can increase your cash holdings and so  that you can find another stock that's on the way up.  now here are some of the suggestions that i have.  i have spoken to a lot of experienced institutional traders while i was at  morgan, and i'll give you a gist of some of the suggestions that many experienced  institutional traders believe, and i think that will help you identify market tops.  firstly, closely watch indices like the dow jones industrial average or  the nasdaq composite and s&p 500.  basically pay a lot of attention to the relationship between volume and the index.  now at some point in a bull market,  the volume will start to fade as the index continues to be strong.  that's a bad sign.  that's a bad sign that there aren't any more buyers out there.  secondly, watch the relationship between volume and  your stock price, the stock that you have invested.  low volume doesn't tell us much, but  large volume tends to help support price movements.  thirdly, track the activity for  the volume price activity for four or five days during that time period.  this trend often precedes an overall market downturn.  feeding upon itself, it's almost a self-fulfilling prophecy.  and the quote unquote mood of the market can quickly go from  bull to bear, and that can happen rather quickly.  which leads us to rule number six,  that is to sell into rallies that have fading volume.  so rule number six is essentially to sell into rallies that have decreased volumes.  try not to miss those market top indicators,  as you may lose profits you have already achieved.  if you've been on a good streak, you don't want to quickly change  from offense to defense if you can avoid doing that.  identifying market tops can be a profitable component  to your market strategy in both the short and long term.  finally, rule number seven, which is to have an exit plan and  target for every single stock.  so you need to have an exit plan and a target for every single stock.  few experienced traders ever invest in any stock without having an exit strategy.  in its simplest form, an exit strategy means planning when and  how to sell before you even enter into an investment.  understand your goals, set limits on market values on both upside and  downside, and have an action plan that allows you to exit successfully.  the three considerations that typically should dictate your exit strategy.  firstly, how long do you plan to own the security?  you should have an idea of the time period you want to own the investment,  whether you favor a short-term or a long-term hold.  now should circumstances change, you can always modify your original plan and  either shorten or lengthen the ownership target.  so that's something that you can do.  secondly, what level of risk do you plan to endure?  ideally zero risk would be great, zero risk would be wonderful, but  that's not possible.  so you need to decide how much risk you're comfortable with,  how much are you willing to lose.  now this can appear to be a moving target, but  you should set a risk parameter even if you're wrong.  making a habit of noting risk will help your eventual success rate.  also, at what price do you want to exit?  now this component is both the easiest and  sometimes the most troubling component in your exit strategy.  you'll invariably find that you ask yourself,  should i wait until the price goes higher than my original exit target?  or should i hold a stock a bit longer,  even though it's decreased to my exit target,  to give it a chance to kind of recover?  in most cases, if you've developed a thoughtful, fact-based,  analytical exit strategy, you should resist the temptation to change your plan.  of course, if factual events occur that indicate a strategy change,  make it to protect your portfolio.  however, protecting your values  should be at the top of your exit strategy checklist.  a good exit strategy, finally,  is just being actually faithful to rule number one,  which is ride your winners and cut your losers.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video you will know the importance of a trading plan in  currency markets.  you'll also know what goes into a trading plan.  you will know why people fail to follow a trading plan.  >> developing a disciplined simple trading plan.  no matter which trading style you decide to pursue,  you need an organized trading plan or you won't get very far.  the difference between making money and losing money, especially in the forex  market, can be as simple as trading with a plan or trading without one.  a trading plan is essentially an organized approach to  executing a trade strategy that you have developed,  either based on your market analysis or on the outlook that you have.  some of the key components of any trading plan, they're very simple.  the first one is to determine the position size.  so basically, this is asking the question,  how large a position will you take for each trade strategy?  position size is half the equation for  determining how much money is at stake in each trade.  second, deciding where to enter the position.  exactly where will you try to open the desired position.  what happens if your entry level is not reached?  third, setting stock losses and taking profit levels.  you need to also set the take profit levels and stop loss levels.  exactly where will you exit the position,  both if it's a winning position which is a take profit level, and  if it's a losing position in which your stop loss will get triggered?  stop loss and take profit levels are the second half of the equation  that determines how much money is at stake in each trade.  that's it, just three simple components.  but it's amazing how many traders, experienced and  beginners alike, o pen positions with out ever having fully  talked through exactly what their game plan is.  of course, you need to consider  numerous finer points when constructing a trading plan.  but i just want to drive home the point that trading without  an organized plan is like flying an airplane blindfolded.  you may be able to get off the ground, but it's difficult to land safely.  and no matter how good your trading plan is, it won't work if you don't follow it.  sometimes emotions bubble up and distract traders from their trading plan.  other times, an unexpected piece of news or price movement causes traders to  abandon that trade strategy midstream or mid-trade, as the case may be.  either way, when this happens it's the same as  never having a trade plan in the first place.  developing a trade plan and sticking to it,  are the two main ingredients of trading discipline.  it can't be over emphasized.  if you were to name one defining characteristic of successful traders,  it won't be fundamental analysis, or it won't be understanding news and data.  all analytical skills, though they're all important.  no, it would be, it has got to be trading discipline.  traders who follow a disciplined approach are the ones who survive year after year,  and market cycle after market cycle.  they can even be wrong more often than right, and  still make money because they follow a disciplined approach.  if the key to successful trading is a disciplined approach,  developing a trading plan and just sticking to it, then why is it so  hard for many traders to practice trading discipline?  well the answer is a little complex, but  it usually boils down to a simple case of human emotions getting the better of them.  never underestimate the power of emotions to distract and  disrupt your trading strategies.  so, exactly how do you take the emotions out of trading?  the simple answer is, you can't.  as long as your heart is pumping, and  your lungs are breathing, emotions are going to be flowing.  and truth be told, the emotional highs of trading are one  of the reasons why currency traders are drawn to it in the first place.  there is no rush quite like putting on a successful trade and  taking some money out of the currency markets.  so, just accept that you're going to experience some pretty intense emotions  when you're trading.  that was the shorter answer, that you can't,  the longer answer is that, because you can't block out the emotions, the best you  can hope to achieve is to understand where the emotions are coming from.  recognizing them when they hit you and  limiting the impact on your trading.  we'll be discussing this in the other course  on the behavioral aspects of investing, in a lot more detail.  however, it's a lot easier said than done.  but keep in mind, that you can do a few things to keep your emotions in check.  firstly, you need to focus on the pips and not the actual money,  the dollars and the cents.  so don't be distracted by the exact amount of money that you have made in a trade.  instead, traders focus on where prices are and how they are behaving.  the market has no idea what your trade size is and  how much you're making or losing.  but it does no where the current price is.  so it's not about being right or wrong, it's about making money.  the market doesn't care if you're right or wrong and neither should you.  the only true way of measuring trading success is in terms of money,  in dollars and cents.  you're going to lose in quite a number of trades.  no trader is right all the time, so  that's something that you need to basically understand.  taking losses is as much a part of the routine as taking profits.  you can still be a very successful trader, over time,  with a solid risk management plan and a solid trading plan.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you will be able to understand producer price index.  you will also be able to predict the movements in stock markets,  bond markets and currency markets in response to the consumer price index data.  producer price index.  producer price index or ppi is another measure of inflation.  and as you all know, inflation is public enemy number one for financial markets,  because it can wipe the out the value of bond portfolios.  it can depress stock prices and push interest rates higher.  the ppi measures changes in prices, that manufacturers and wholesalers pay for  goods at various stages of production.  any wave of inflation here could eventually be translated, or  transmitted to the retail level.  any wave of inflation here could eventually  be transmitted to the retail level.  after all, if businesses have to pay more for goods,  it's pretty likely that they'll pass on some of those higher costs to consumers.  in addition to keeping a close on the ppi, the investment community  looks at a small subset off the ppi known as core ppi.  a measure that excludes the public categories of food and energy.  food and energy can be fairly volatile and  these two commodity groups make up 40% of the ppi.  so any abnormal weather pattern or a temporary disruption in oil supplies  can greatly distort the inflation numbers and mislead market analysts.  so to get a more accurate reading of the underlying inflation trend,  the core ppi is given equal and at times even greater concentration than the ppi.  so what effect does ppi have on stock prices,  on bond prices and currency prices?  stocks, for the most part, a jump in the ppi means higher production costs for  companies and this can erode profits and endanger dividends.  although some stock investors argue that a little inflation is a good thing because  it allows producers to charge more for goods, which kind of bolsters revenues.  there is a point during beyond which inflation pressures can  do more harm than good to equities.  so in general a lot of inflation is not very good.  but ppi may not be a very good or  an ideal leading indicator of consumer prices but  you would never know that from the way the bond market reacts to ppi data.  producer price inflation is one of the hottest  economic indicators released by the government.  fixed income investors intuitively believe that a jump in ppi can be or  should be wake up call for bond investors.  if the ppi detects rising price pressure in the economy.  it could depress bond prices and force interest rates higher.  no change or an actual decline in producer prices is viewed favorably by  bond holders because it suggests that the absence of any troublesome inflation.  what effect does ppi have on currencies?  a rise in the ppi is a tough call for  participants in the foreign exchange market.  normally, because it benefits from a little pick up in inflation,  since this kind of profits shot the interest rates higher.  a fast rising inflation report however, can hurt the currency.  a fast rising inflation however,  can hurt the currency because the central bank can respond so  aggressively as to jeopardize the country's economic growth altogether.  by and large, a gradual rise in inflation that is accompanied  by a well-timed tightening of monetary policy is likely  to lead to an appreciation of the domestic currency.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching the video, you will know how to make a trade and  the different ways of doing it.  you will know how to trade using the click and deal features of the platform and  you will know how to use orders to trade.  as they say, you actually learn by doing.  so the best way for you to get a handle on what currency trading is  all about is to actually trade using small amounts initially.  the money at stake should not be too large because you  actually going to gain experience in how trading actually works and  you may be making some mistakes so it's ideal to trade with really small amounts.  this lecture will actually teach you a few tricks of the trade  to make money even with small denominations.  trading with small amounts,  we know the advantage is that it gives you a chance to experience the forex markets.  you can actually see how prices change at different times of the day,  how various currency pairs may differ from each other and  how the forex market reacts to new information when major news and  economic data is released.  i mean the reason why i suggest smaller margins is because you can trade  in real market conditions without fear of losing much money.  you can also experiment with different trading strategies to see how they work.  and gain experience using different orders and managing open positions.  which will also help you improve your understanding how margin trading and  leverage work.  trading with small amount is also a great way to experience the forex market up and  close and personal.  they're an excellent way to test drive all the features and  functionalities of a broker's platform.  however, one thing that you really cannot simulate or really cannot experience  with small amount of monies is that is the emotions of trading, because you  really won't get mad at yourself for losing small amounts of money.  the first thing that you need to do, is to actually put on a trade.  you make trades in the forex market one of the two ways.  one you can trade at the market or  the current price using the click and deal feature of your broker's platform.  or you can actually employ orders such as limit orders and  one cancels the other orders also called as ocos.  first clicking and dealing, how do you basically do that.  many traders like the idea of opening a trade position by trading at the market as  opposed to leaving an order that may or may not get executed.  i typically prefer the certainty of knowing that i am in the market.  actively buying and selling are also elements that make trading and  speculating as much fun as it's hard work.  so it's nice if you can actually get in the market and  not actually put an order for that.  most forex brokers provide live streaming prices and  you can deal on that with a simple click ff your computer mouse.  to execute a trade on those platforms,  first you need to specify the amount of the trade you want to make and  then you typically click buy or sell button to execute the trade.  the forex trading platform typically responds back usually within a second or  two, and sometimes these days much faster,  to let you know whether the trade went through or not.  if the trade went through you'll receive a pop-up confirmation from the platform and  see your open position listing updated to reflect the new trade.  if the trade fails because the trading price changed before your request was  received, you might receive a response indicating something like rates changed or  prices weren't available or something along those lines.  you then need to repeat the same steps again, to make another trade attempt.  attempts to trade at the market can sometimes fail in very,  very fast moving markets which happens in currencies  often when prices are adjusting quickly, very, very rapidly.  they happen especially in currency markets after data release or  if there is a break of a key price point, that's when prices move a lot.  part of this stems from the latency effect of trading.  which essentially means the time lag between the platform price  reaching your computer and your trade request reaching the platform's server.  understand from the word go that  any action that you take on a trading platform is your responsibility.  you may have meant to click on the buy button instead of the sell button, but  no one knows for sure except you.  and by the way, you really cannot undo it  with a control z as you do within the windows operating system.  so once you hit the button, it's not about what you intended that counts,  it actually gets executed any which way.  you can also use orders.  and orders are typical trading tools in forex markets.  you can think of them as trades waiting to happen because  that's what they actually are.  if you enter an order and  a subsequent price actually triggers its execution, you are in the market.  so be careful, at least as careful as when you're placing your order in the market.  currency traders use orders to catch market movements when  they are not in front of their screens.  do remember that forex markets are open 24 hours a day,  five days a week, as we discussed earlier.  a market move is just as likely to happen when you are sleeping or watching a movie,  as while you are in front of your computer screen looking to trade.  orders are how you know you can act  on the market without being actually physically there.  and you know, institution traders, professional currency traders routinely  use orders to do a lot of things like for instance, to implement a trade strategy  from entry to exit to capture sharp shock stock price fluctuations.  they use it for limiting risk in volatile or uncertain markets.  they also use it to preserve trading capital from unwanted losses.  they use it for maintaining trading discipline.  they use it to protect profits and minimize losses.  now i can't stress enough the importance of using orders in currency trading.  forex markets can be notoriously volatile and very difficult to predict.  using orders helps you to capitalize on short term market movements  while limiting the impact of any adverse price moves.  while there is no guarantee that the orders will limit your losses and  protect your profits in all market conditions,  a disciplined use of orders helps you to quantify the risk you're taking.  and with any luck, also gives you peace of mind in your trading.  bottom line is that if you dont used are dose you probably dont  have of well thought out training strategy and thats a recipe for pain.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes.  after watching this video, you will be able to understand the different types of  orders such as take profit orders, limit orders, stop loss orders,  trailing stop loss orders, one cancels the other orders, and contingent orders.  you will know when to place which of the above orders.  multiple types of orders that are available in the forex market.  now bear in mind that not all order types are available at all brokers.  so do add order types to your list of questions,  to ask your prospector forex broker.  the first kind of order is what is called as take profit orders.  well don't you just love that name, take profit?  an old market saying goes,  you can't go broke taking profits, so you can actually use take profit orders  to lock in gains when you have an open position in the market.  let's say you're short usd, jpy at 117.20,  your take profit order will be to buy back the position, and  replace somewhere below that price, let's say at 116.80.  let's take another example,  if you say long gpb usd cable data at 1.8840,  your take profit order will be to sell the position  somewhere higher, maybe 1.8875 perhaps.  other kind of orders are limit orders.  a limit order is any order that triggers a trade at more favorable  levels than the current market price.  think buy low, sell high, if the limit order is to buy,  it must be entered at a price below the current market price.  if the limit orders is to sell,  it must be entered at a price higher than the current market price.  other kind of orders are stop loss orders, well the name sounds bad,  i mean, stop loss.  but actually stop loss orders are critical to trading survival,  the traditional stop loss orders does just that.  it stops losses by closing out an open position that is losing money.  you can use stop loss orders to limit your losses if  the market moves against your position.  because if you don't, then you're leaving it up to the market and  that's quite dangerous.  stop loss orders are on the other side of the current rise from take profits orders,  but in the same direction in terms of buying or selling.  if you're long, your stop loss orders will be to sell, but  at a lower price than the current market price.  if you're short your stop loss order will be to buy, but at a higher price than  the current market, another kind of orders are trailing stop loss orders.  one of the key things to successful trading is to cut losing positions  quickly and let winning positions run.  a trailing stop loss order allows you to just do precisely that.  the idea is that when you have a winning trade on, you wait for  the market to stage a reversal and take you out,  instead of trying to pick the right level to exit on your own.  a trailing stop loss order is a stop loss order that you set at a fixed number  of pips from your entry rate.  the trailing stop loss adjusts the order rate,  as the market price moves but only in the direction of your trade.  for example, if you long euro suisse, euro chf,  at say 1.5750, and you set the trailing stop at say 30 pips.  the stop will initially become active at 1.5720,  which is essentially 30 pips lower than 1.5750.  if the euro suisse, which is euro chf price moves higher to say 1.5760,  the stop adjusts higher pip for pip, with the price and  will then be active at 1.5730.  the trailing stop continues to adjust higher as long as the market  continues to move higher.  when the market puts you in a top, your trailing stop will be 30 pips,  or whatever distance you specified below that top wherever it may be.  if the market ever goes down by 30 pips, let's say as in this example,  your stop will be triggered and your position will be closed.  so in this case if you're long at say 1.5750 and you're setting  a 30 pip trailing stop, the stop initially becomes active at 1.5720.  if the market never picks up and goes straight down,  you'll be stopped out at 1.5720.  however, the price first rises to say 1.5775,  and then say, declines by 60 points,  the trailing stop will then have risen to 1.5745.  that's essentially 1.5775 less 30 pips and  that's where you'll be stopped out.  that's seems pretty cool i suppose.  the other kind of order is what is called as one cancels the other order.  a one cancels the other order, more commonly referred to as an o-c-o order,  an oco order, is a stop loss order paired with a take profit order.  an oco order is the ultimate insurance policy for any open position.  because your position stays open until one of the order levels is reached  by the market and closes your position.  when one order level is reached and  triggered, the other order automatically cancels.  let's take an example, let's say you short dalian,  which is usd/jpy at 117.00.  you think if it goes up beyond 117.50, it's going to keep going higher,  so that's where you decide to place your stop loss buying order.  at the same time you believe that dalian, a usd/jpy,  has downside potential to say 116.25.  so that's where you set your set your take profit buying order.  you now have two orders bracketing the market, and  your risk is clearly defined therefore.  so as long as the market trades between these two levels 116.26 and  117.49, your position remains open.  if 116.25 is reached first,  your take profit triggers and you buy back at a profit.  let's say if 117 is hit, your position is stopped out at a loss.  so oco orders are highly recommended for every open position.  the last kind of orders are contingent orders.  contingent orders is a fancy term for combining several types  of orders to create a complete currency trade strategy, if you would like.  so you use contingent orders to put on a trade while let's say you're sleeping or  otherwise indisposed, knowing that your contingent order has all  the business covered for you, and your risks are defined.  contingent orders are also referred to as if then orders,  if then orders require the if order to be done first.  and then the second part of the order becomes active, so  that's sometimes also called if done then orders, if done then orders.  the key features of most broker's orders policies is that your orders  are a executed based or the price spread of the trading platform.  that means that your limit orders to buy is only filled  if the trading platforms off a price reaches your buy rate.  and similarly, a limit order to sell is only triggered if  the trading platform's bid price reaches your sell rate.  some brokerage firms might guarantee against slippages  on your stop loss orders in normal market conditions.  but rarely, if ever,  will a broker guarantee stop loss orders during volatile times.  like say when there is a release of an economic report or  a very important data release is happening during peak time  in european hours, or early new york time.  [music] 
[music]  learning outcomes, after watching this video,  you will be able to manage your currency trade.  you will also know how to make changes to the trading plan.  so, you've actually pulled the trigger and opened up the position, and  now you're in the market.  time to sit back and let the market do its thing, right?  well, not so fast, the forex market isn't a roller wheel where you  place your bets and watch the wheel spin and simply take the results.  it's much more than that, it's actually a dynamic,  fluid environment where new information and price developments  create new opportunities and alter previous expectations.  i hope you take the sage advice of all experienced currency traders,  or traders in general, that you need to always trade with a plan.  which is to identify in advance where to enter and  where to exit every trade on both a stop-loss and take-profit basis.  the bottom line is you improve your overall chances of creating success, and  therefore minimize the risks involved,  by carefully planning each trade before getting caught up in the emotions and  noise of the market which invariably does happen.  depending on the style of trading you are pursuing, be it,  say, short term versus medium to long term and  overall market conditions, is it say range bound or is it trending?  you'll either have to move or so you'll have to either more or  less do when managing, you do exactly pretty much what you're doing when  you're managing an open position.  if you're following a medium to longer term strategy with generally wider  stop-loss and take-profit parameters,  you may prefer to go with a set it and forget it kind of a trade plan.  but a lot can happen between the time  you open a trade and prices hitting one of your trade levels.  so staying on top of the market is still a very good idea even for  longer term trades.  no matter which trading style you follow, it pays to keep up with market news and  price developments while your trade is active.  because unexpected news that impacts your position may  come into the market at any point of time.  news is news at the end of the day, and  by definition you couldn't have accounted for in your trading plan.  so fresh news may require making changes to your trading plan.  when we talk about making changes to the trading plan, we are referring only to  reducing the overall risk of the trade by taking profits, which could be full or  partial, or moving the stop-loss in the direction of the trade.  the idea is to be fluid and  dynamic in one direction only, which is to take profits and reduce risk.  keep your ultimate stop-loss point where you decided it should go before  you entered the trade, and staying alert for news and data developments.  so if your trade is let's say, reliant on a rationale on certain data or  event expectations, you need to be especially alert for  upcoming reports on those themes.  let's say part of your calculus to go short on euro usd, for  instance, maybe based on the view that eurozone inflation pressures are receding,  suggesting lower eurozone interest rates ahead.  if the next day eurozone consumer price index, cpi, a report confirms your views,  the fundamental basis for maintaining the strategy is kind of getting reinforced.  or you may then consider whether to increase your take profit objective  depending on the market's reaction.  and by the same token, if the cpi report comes out unexpectedly high,  the fundamental basis for your trade is seriously undermined.  and that could serve as a clue to exit the market earlier  than you originally planned.  every trade strategy needs to take into account upcoming news and  data events before the position is opened.  ideally you should be aware of all data reports and news events scheduled  to occur during the anticipated time horizon of your trade strategy.  you should also have a good understanding of what the market  is expecting in terms of event outcomes.  and what can you anticipate and how the market is anticipating  the data to come and how the market is likely to react.  keeping an eye on other financial markets also helps, because  forex markets function alongside other major financial markets such as stocks,  bonds, and commodities like gold, oil, and so on.  and very important fundamental and psychological relationships can exist  between other markets and currencies at certain points of time.  so you need to look out for developments in other financial markets to see whether  they confirm or contradict price moves in the currency players that you are trading.  finally, you want to evaluate your trading results.  and regardless of the outcome of any trade, you should ideally look  back over the whole process to understand what you did right and what you did wrong.  in particular, ask yourself some of the following questions,  which all currency traders do.  for instance, how did you identify the trade opportunity?  was it based on, say, fundamental view or technical analysis or  some combination of the two?  looking at your trade this way kind of helps you to identify your strengths and  weaknesses as either a fundamental or a technical trader.  for example, if fundamental analysis generates more of your winning trades,  you'll probably want to devote more energy to that approach.  and you also need to see and check how well did your trade plan work out?  was the position size sufficient to match the risk and  reward scenarios, or was it too large or too small?  could you have entered at a better level?  what tools might you have used to improve your entry timing?  were you patient enough, or  did you rush in thinking you would never have the chance again?  was your taking profit realistic, or was it a pie in the sky?  did the markets pay any respect to your choice of take profit levels or  did the price blow right through it?  ask yourself the same questions about your stop loss levels,  and use the answers to refine your position size,  your entry level, and the art of placement going forward.  how well did you manage the trade after it was opened?  were you able to effectively monitor the market while your trade was active?  if so, how?  if not, why not?  the answers to those kind of questions reveal a lot about how much  dynamically you would be able to manage your trade in future.  did you modify your trade plan along the way?  did you adjust stop losses to protect profits?  did you take partial profit at all?  or, let's say, did you close out the trade based on your trading plan,  or did the market surprise you somehow?  based on the answers, you will learn what role your emotions have played, and  how disciplined a trader you are.  please note that there are no right or wrong answers in this review process,  just be as honest as possible with yourself as you can be.  because no one else will ever know your answers.  and you have everything to gain by identifying what you're good at and  what you're not so good at and how you as a trader should be approaching the market.  so evaluating your trading results on a regular basis is an essential step  to improving your trading skills, refining your trading styles, maximizing  your trading strengths, and in the process also minimizing your trading weaknesses.  all good, experienced institutional currency traders do that,  and that's how they become good at that trade.  [music] 
[music]  so we're now at the end of our course on the global financial crisis.  what have we learned?  first, secretary geithner talked to us about the lessons from history.  the only reliable predictor of financial crises  is an increase in leverage in the overall economy.  lots of other things seem to by signals, but one thing we know for sure is that  in advance of every financial crisis, there is a large increase in leverage.  when such leverage occurs, we are particularly vulnerable to a panic when  this debt is short-term, called runnable.  people can run very fast to try to get it out.  it has been a long time since the last crisis.  so there's some complacency.  this time is different thinking.  it is accompanied by a housing boom, which has been present in every major financial  crisis in large industrialized economies since world war ii.  we turn next to understanding the demand side and supply side.  the supply side coming from housing.  that's where we supplied the raw material that could make up safe assets that were  being demanded all around the world.  from 2003 to 2007 there was a large increase in the demand for  safe assets coming from many parts of the world.  at the same time, the easy supply of safe assets from the debt of rich countries  was shrinking or flat.  in the united states, we were actually running some budget surpluses.  and just supply of us government debt is actually shrinking at the same time  that many many investors want to hold us government debt, or some substitute to it.  to meet this increased demand,  the financial sector responded by manufacturing safe assets  through securitization and other financial innovations of the shadow banking sector.  on the supply side for housing, what we've known for  a long time, and banks have been doing it since we've had banks, is that the best  way to manufacture safe assets is by using simple, easy to understand collateral.  the housing boom and its role in the build-up to the crisis was strongly  influenced by the belief on the part of many market participants  that housing prices would continue to rise, which brings us to complacency.  financial panics are a bit like disease epidemics.  they happen at surprisingly regular intervals,  as shown in the graphic displayed by secretary giger.  we need a new population of victims that have not previously  been exposed to disease, in order to have an epidemic to happen.  and we need a new population of investors, and savers, and consumers,  who have not previously been exposed to a very deep financial panic, for  them to believe that it could not happen again.  to stretch another analogy, panics are also like forest fires.  the longer it has been since we have had one,  the bigger the fire will be when it actually comes.  you've got a very long period of time,  75 years between the great depression and the global financial crisis.  that was enough time for  a fair amount of complacency to build up in a lot of quarters,  thinking this was not the type of thing that would happen in a developed country,  and for when it finally did happen, for the fire to burn very very hot.  to understand global financial crisis, we really need to get inside the mechanics of  what would happen when we have a panic happen in the shadow banking system or  the parallel banking system, unlike the traditional bank runs of yesteryear.  in the first anxiety phase of the crisis, there were problems in the subprime  housing market that were known to market participants as early as 2005,  but became apparent in market prices.  specifically an index that we've talked about.  that was an index of credit default swabs in the subprime housing market in  early 2007.  these problems in the subprime market spread to interbank markets  in august 2007.  beginning with events at the large french bank bnp paribas on august 9th,  when they admitted an inability to price some  of the securities that were in the portfolios of funds that they manage.  if bnp paribas can't price them, then what hope does the rest of the market have?  the first major bank run of the global financial crisis occurred in  the united kingdom at the large lender northern rock in september of 2007.  coincidentally, beginning just slightly earlier in august,  the asset backed commercial paper market dried up worldwide, draining  between 300 and 400 billion of unsecured funding from financial institutions.  the anxiety phase continued through early 2008 with interbank markets  remaining stressed through the first nine months including several notable events.  the collapse of the somewhat obscure, but  it turns out central, auction rates securities market in february.  evidence that market stress could affect securities such as student loans and  municipal debt that had no direct relationship to subprime.  the large investment bank bear stearns was rescued in march of 2008,  leading to the first use of the federal reserve's emergency powers,  which are also known as their 13(3), for the section  of the federal reserve act that they're listed emergency lending powers.  in the united states, new regulatory powers over the government sponsored  enterprises of fannie mae and freddie mac were given in july by congress.  and then the use of the new powers that were given, specifically conservatorship,  bringing these two large agencies formally under the umbrella of the united states  government, was announced on september 6th.  the panic phase of the crisis can be dated to the famous weekend known  sometimes as lehman weekend, which begins on friday, september 12th.  over that weekend, several very large milestones happen.  bank of america buys merrill lynch, so there was some discussion over that  weekend that bank of america would buy lehman brothers.  but instead they chose to buy merrill lynch,  leaving lehman brothers without an obvious buyer.  one potential buyer, which was barclay's bank, a very large united kingdom lender,  falls through over that weekend for a variety of reasons and  then lehman brothers files for bankruptcy on september 15th.  following lehman's filing for bankruptcy, a very large money market mutual fund  that had invested in some of lehman's debt, the reserve fund, breaks the buck.  meaning, they're no longer able to guarantee that  they can pay 100 cents on the dollar back to their investors.  that happens on september 16th.  that same day, a large bailout, the first large bailout is announced for  american international group,  an enormous insurer based in the united states with operations all over the world.  from these different pieces, from these different events,  it became clear that the markets were in full blown panic.  and at this point, government agencies, which perhaps had been waiting,  not sure if what they were seeing was something that was containable just with  the tools they had available, clearly realized in the united states,  in the united kingdom, in the euro zone, in the asian markets,  that this was going to require a much more forceful response.  secretary geithner took you through this response and  explained some of the motivations that officials had in the united states for  the actions that they took.  these actions were unprecedented.  globally, countries used a combination of emergency lending programs,  usually by their central banks, and then guarantees and  capital injections by their fiscal authorities to fight the panic.  by columbus day weekend, just shortly thereafter,  the worst of the panic phase was over.  but it would still be six more months until the release of stress tests  on banks in the united states, before we could really look at interbank markets and  say that the panic phase was finally over.  on the lending side, in the united states the federal reserve took the lead  on emergency lending programs, using its authority under section 13.3  of the federal reserve act, that we have spoken about earlier in the course.  taf, talf, cpff, tslf, many of which that use special purpose vehicles created so  that the federal reserve could do lending to institutions expanded the feds  lending to cover virtually all of the shadow banking lending sector.  on the guarantee side, in the united states, it was led by the fdic,  which has the authority to guarantee the liabilities of banks when there is  systemic risk in the financial sector.  the programs helped banks to borrow in debt markets, and  provided unlimited insurance for non interest bearing transaction accounts.  but countries need to be careful about guarantees.  ireland tried to guarantee a large portion of their banking system.  and it lead ultimately to a sovereign debt crisis,  because the banking system was simply too large for  the government to be able to promise that they could actually bail out.  this case we see attention.  we need to have a forceful response.  but in some cases,  the government simply lacks the ultimate fire power to make that response credible.  for capital, when banks are either insolvent, or  where their depositors feel that they may be insolvent,  ultimately you need to inject some capital into the banks.  the government needs to make formal investments in order to restore solvency  and the confidence of that solvency to the system.  the united states passed a law authorizing tarp,  the troubled asset relief program on september 30, 2008.  but did not figure out exactly how to use it for another 11 days, eventually  following the lead of the united kingdom, and using direct capital injections into  the banks, instead of buying troubled assets off of their balance sheets.  at the same time in europe,  the global financial crisis really can be thought of as not being finished.  the crisis exposed underlying economic problems in the eurozone,  exacerbated by policy mistakes and structural rigidity.  bailouts have been required in greece, ireland, portugal,  and cyprus, and spain and italy still remain precarious.  in the aftermath of the global financial crisis throughout the world,  policy makers have created new authorities, and  been given new responsibilities for the management of something called systemic  risk, the risk of another catastrophic failure for the entire financial system.  this authority did not exist,  except in very few countries, prior to the global financial crisis.  however the radical innovations that were necessary during the global financial  crisis also created a backlash.  so while some of the peace time outside of crisis powers to try to prevent  another crisis have been increased, some of the war time powers, the things that  were used to actually rescue the system during the crisis, have been curtailed.  this means is that, in the next crisis,  it may be a more difficult job that we have to rescue the financial system.  we hope you've learned on this tour of the global financial crisis.  it's crucial that citizens understand the causes and dynamics of this crisis, so  that we can best avoid a future one.  and if necessary, fight that crisis together and more effectively.  like similar events in the past, the consequences of this global financial  crisis will likely echo for many generations.  and it will not be possible to fully understand the world without recognizing  those echos.  [sound]  [music] 
[music]  welcome to module 6, the first part of our discussion about anxiety.  specifically, the anxiety that took hold in markets beginning in  the middle of 2007.  in lesson one, we'll talk about some notable events in 2007.  things that aren't as famous as the lehman brothers bankruptcy in 2008 but  really were the very strong precursors  to what eventually turned into the global financial crisis.  in order to really understand these events,  this is going to be a module where we give a lot of acronyms,  a lot of new acronyms that are relatively obscure and not ones that you would  typically pay attention to outside of a study of the global financial crisis.  the first of these acronyms, which we will talk about in lessons two and three,  is the abx, which in an index that tells us what's going on  in subprime mortgage markets.  so just how risky do people think subprime mortgage markets are?  once we have the introduction to the abx, we can take a look at what happened in  the summer of 2007, when anxiety first spread from what was going on in subprime  housing markets into the financial system, with concern about the financial system.  this is despite the fact that just two months earlier, chairman ben bernanke gave  a speech saying we understand that subprime is a problem but  we don't think it's going to infect the broader financial system.  to see how it did infect the broader financial system, in lessons five and  six, we introduce a few more acronyms.  importantly, the difference between the libor,  the london interbank offering rate and the ois, the overnight index swap.  that's a lot of words to explain a very simple concept,  which is just how safe did the banking system appear to its counter parties?  how expensive was it for  banks to borrow on an unsecured basis versus an unsecured basis?  a measure of fear in interbank markets.  this fear in interbank markets, which first manifests itself in august of 2007,  finds a particularly strong outcome in asset-backed commercial paper,  or our last acronym of this module, abcp.  asset-backed commercial paper is another form of manufacturing safe assets,  similar to securitization.  the markets in asset-back commercial paper grew tremendously  during the global savings glut period and then collapsed in the second half of 2007.  that collapse really was a drain on liquidity to the overall banking system,  a very important precursor to the financial crisis that would become  full blown in 2008.  and then finally, in lecture 11,  we summarize what we've learned in this module.  [music] 
[music]  welcome to module 7, our second part of the study of anxiety.  the period before the lehman brothers bankruptcy in 2008.  we talk in this module about a few case studies and  these case studies help us to see.  help us to trace through how a problem in the subprime sector  of the financial markets can actually affect  parts of the markets that would seem to have no exposure to subprime.  this is kind of the key question, the key point about the global financial crisis.  which is, how does it spread?  how does it go and become an epidemic?  how to we get financial word of contagion?  we begin with a discussion of northern rock.  which is a british lender based in the north east of england that ended up  requiring assistance and suffering a run on the bank in september of 2007.  what's interesting about northern rock is they had very,  very little exposure to subprime.  in fact, the main problem they had was the exposure they had  to the overall wholesale funding markets,  the markets that suffered a lot of anxiety beginning in the summer of 2007.  we'll talk about northern rock in the first two lessons.  we move then from northern rock into  two lessons about relatively obscure parts of financial markets.  but obscure parts that turn out to be quite large and quite important.  first, in lesson three, we'll talk about the monolines,  which are insurance companies that until the global savings glut period,  were a very sleepy part of the market that specialized in insuring municipal debt,  but that moved into insuring subprime securitizations during the gsg.  the monolines played a very important role in the municipal debt markets.  and much municipal debt was sold in the form of something called auction rate  securities, which we will describe in lesson four.  now, when the monolines ran into trouble,  as they did because of their exposure to subprime, the auction rates  securities markets that the monolines supported ran into trouble as well.  and what ended up happening was municipalities that were nowhere near  subprime in any way, suddenly found much higher borrowing costs.  then, in lessons five through seven,  we will talk about the first major institution to be a casualty of  the financial crisis in the united states and that was bear stearns,  a large investment bank which first had trouble in the summer of 2007.  but then saw $20 billion of liquidity drained from  it in the second week of march, 2008.  and then in lesson eight, we'll summarize  with what we learned in this module.  [music] 
[music]  welcome to module 11, europe during the global financial crisis.  in this module, we're going to see the parallels  to what happened in the united states that happened in a variety of countries  in europe during the time period 2007 to 2009.  what's interesting here is to begin with,  europe has a different monetary structure than what we saw in the united states.  united states, we have a single currency for the entire country.  in europe, there are some subset of europe that have one currency, the euro.  and then other countries that are within geographically europe, but  also within a larger economic area of europe that have their own currencies.  and these differences turn out to be very important.  i give the background for that in lesson one, and in lesson two,  let's give you some basic statistics about growth and  unemployment in europe leading up to and during the global financial crisis.  now what eventually happened in europe and what we will cover in this module and  in the next module is a crisis that started as the global financial crisis,  but then grew into something else called the eurozone crisis, which was a problem  specifically for the countries that shared the single currency of the euro.  now the eurozone crisis can be thought of as three different connected crises,  going on in a variety of different parts of their economic system.  and we'll talk about that in lesson three.  lesson four,  we'll go through a timeline of europe during the global financial crisis.  and then in lessons five and six, look at two special cases that are very  interesting, both for understanding europe during the global financial crisis.  and then for  which types of countries ended up in trouble during the eurozone crisis.  in lesson five, we will look at ireland, and in lesson six,  we will look at iceland.  lesson seven summarizes what we've learned in this module.  [music] 
[music]  welcome to module 3 on housing and mortgages.  the lessons in this module introduce some key terms about housing and mortgages,  key terms that we will see show up many times throughout the course.  in the first lesson, we will discuss the relationship between housing bubbles and  financial crisis.  how housing bubbles have been a common feature of financial crisis  in all major economies since world war ii.  then in the next three modules we'll go through some definitions about mortgages.  first, the difference between fixed and adjustable rate mortgages in lesson two.  then the definition of prime mortgages in lesson three.  and then non-prime mortgages in lesson four.  where non-prime mortgages is a super set that includes the famous term of  subprime mortgages.  in lesson five, we'll turn directly to subprime mortgages.  many people refer to the crisis that we just had as  a subprime crisis which is really not accurate.  if, to the extent we have something called the subprime crisis,  its a subset of the financial crisis.  nevertheless, subprime mortgages play an important role in the crisis and  understanding why it might make some sense under some circumstances  to actually offer and take out a subprime mortgage is important.  and we'll talk about that in lesson five.  in lesson six, we turn to the foreclosure crisis,  which is part of the housing crisis when people lost their homes because they were  unable to pay their mortgages.  the foreclosure crisis was widespread throughout the united states, but  particularly bad in some regions of the united states, and  for some types of mortgages.  and we'll present those facts in lesson six.  finally in lesson seven,  we'll pull together all these various terms about crisis.  particularly housing crisis, financial crisis, and great recession.  and explain how these different terms relate to each other and  why they're not exactly the same thing.  and then lesson eight will summarize what we've learned in this module.  [music] 
[music]  all right, welcome to module eight,  the panic phase of the global financial crisis.  we begin with a discussion of shadow banking,  picking up on a discussion we had earlier in the course, but  now going into more detail about the different institutions  that will be involved in the various functions of the shadow banking system.  we'll then turn to a more detailed discussion of repo, short for sale and  repurchase agreements, which we know from our discussion of bear stearns,  played an important role in bear stearns' required rescue.  and is going to turnout to play a very important role overall in the freezing up  of the financial system in the panic phase.  going to look at specific institutions and markets and  what happened to them during this very, very panic phase of the crisis.  first the government-sponsored enterprises, fannie mae and  freddie mac, which required a rescue just before lehman brothers.  then the key event of the panic phase,  which was the bankruptcy of lehman brothers on september 15th, 2008.  that was quickly followed by the breaking of the buck  by the money market mutual fund reserve primary and a run, specifically,  by institutional investors in money market mutual funds.  we'll turn to american international group, aig, and  even larger entity than lehman brothers, which required an enormous rescue,  multiple rounds of an enormous rescue from the federal government.  we'll return back to repo.  all of these different pieces were related to a run that was going on  across a variety of short-term money markets.  most notably at this time, the repo market where we saw  effectively something that looked like a run on the bank by institutional investors  increasing the amount of collateral they would require for any amount, for  any dollar that they were going to provide in lending. 
[music]  welcome to module 4 on safe assets and the global savings glut.  in this module, take you through a variety of very, very important building blocks  for understanding how the shadow banking, wholesale banking system is set up.  first, a set of introductions.  just what we think of as shadow banking and how it is parallel or  similar to the traditional banking system.  we'll do that in lesson one.  then this term, safe assets that you have already heard a little bit about and  will hear much more about, as the course goes along, will be defined and  put into the context of what was going on in the world over the last few decades.  then there will be three lessons on what is now known as the global savings glut  hypothesis, or the gsg hypothesis, a term that was coined by ben bernanke,  before he was chairman of the federal reserve.  in talking about the large amount of savings in the developing countries  like china and oil producing countries from the middle east that became  awash in the world in the early part of the 21st century and  led to a lot of demand for what we call safe assets.  this demand was met by, at that time,  a strangely diminishing supply and we'll talk about that supply in lesson six.  in a world where there is excess demand for anything, you are going to go and  you are going to see that there's some producer that's gonna come out and  manufacture it.  in the case of safe assets, those producers are financial institutions and  they manufacture safe assets predominately through a process called securitization.  we will talk about that process and  exactly what is the mechanics behind that process in lessons seven and eight.  in lessons nine and ten, we'll look at some data on securitization that  shows how securitization grew right along with the global savings glut  in the early years of the 21st century.  finally, in lesson 11, we summarize what we've learned in this module.  [music] 
[music]  welcome to module 12, the continuing eurozone crisis.  the eurozone crisis begins after the worst part  of the global financial crisis has receded both in europe and in the united states.  in lesson one i'll give you an introduction and  some background to that crisis.  and then in lessons two thru four we'll go thru a timeline  cuz the crisis can be thought of in several different phases.  in lesson five we'll talk about the fundamental structural reason  that europe has these continuing problems.  which is having a single currency when really the economics of the eurozone  don't suggest that they should have one currency, but perhaps have several.  in lesson six through eight we'll return to our study of ireland and  iceland that we began in the previous module.  ireland and iceland have had very different experiences  in coming out of the global financial crisis.  in large part because ireland is a member of the single currency euro zone and  iceland is not.  in lesson nine, we'll talk about internal devaluations.  which is the only method that you have when you're in  a single currency to be able to devalue and  become more competitive relative to other regions using that same currency.  and then, in lesson 10, we will see a very important historical parallel  between today's eurozone crisis and the great depression of the 1930s.  lesson 11 summarizes what we learned in this module.  [music] 
[music]  welcome to module 5 on the housing crisis.  in this module, we're going to talk about three different hypotheses that  commentators give for the housing crisis, for the causes of the housing crisis, and  the evidence for each of these hypotheses.  i'll introduce these hypotheses in the first lessons.  we will talk about hypothesis 1, which is that it was moral hazard, bad behavior,  a kind of inside job and manipulation that caused the housing crisis.  in lesson 6 and 7,  talk about the evidence for hypothesis 2, which that it was government failure,  both actions by government that caused the housing crisis and  then inactions by regulators that didn't see the problem early enough.  and then we'll talk in lesson 8 about hypothesis 3,  which is that it was bubble thinking, really mistakes made in forecasting what  was going to happen in housing markets by both buyers of houses and lenders  to them that coincided with a period of macroeconomic upheaval and the global  savings glut that put together were the primary cause of the housing crisis.  in lesson 9, we summarized the evidence, and because this isn't a mystery novel,  i can tell you right at the outset that the evidence is strongest for  hypothesis 3 of bubble thinking and weakest for the other two.  [music] 
[music]  welcome to the course on the global financial crisis.  my name is andrew matric.  i am a professor at yale university.  and i'm here with.  >> i'm tim geithner.  >> and we're going to be talking to you over  the next few modules about the global financial crisis.  and this is a very important historical event.  only four times in the last 200 years has there been a financial crisis  that has been global, that has affected multiple regions around the world.  when these events happen, it has an enormous effect on economic growth and  on the lives of everybody who is around for the financial crisis.  that effect persists for years, for decades, and sometimes  the deep psychological effects on a society can persist over many generations.  but in order to understand what's going on and  what happened in the last financial crisis and why financial crises are important.  it's really important to get into the weeds.  to see a lot of the details that lead to the build up of crisis.  the different trip wires that occur that make the crisis get worse.  and then the various reactions that policy makers can have.  what makes you very lucky in taking this class is that my colleague,  secretary geithner, was watching this crisis unfold.  and doing his very best to try to alleviate the effects of this crisis for  a long time.  and i wonder, when was it that you first realized that what you were looking at  was, perhaps a global financial crisis?  >> well it felt ominous, certainly by the summer of 07, maybe before that.  but as andrew said, these things are terrible, they're tragic.  they have devastating consequences and  they happen to individual countries around the world really more than they should.  and what makes them so terrible,  is probably the choices people make in advance.  the failure to limit risk when you should, but  it's also the decision people make in the crisis.  and i think part of the value of looking back and understanding is to try  to improve the odds that people make better choices in the future.  that governments and central banks, and parliaments, congresses make  better decisions about what to do to help protect people, protect economies from  really one of the most devastating things that can happen in economics.  >> a lot of the things that  governments need to do during a financial crisis seem almost  exactly the opposite of what you would want to do outside of a financial crisis.  this makes it very confusing for the public, for  citizens to understand why these actions are being taken.  and in fact,  that very misunderstanding end up feeding back through the political system.  and constraining our ability to react as well as we can  to help alleviate the terrible effects of the crisis.  so one important goal of this course is to help people to understand  these very complex phenomena that are financial crises.  >> but also just the cold, hard,  messy reality of what they really look like in real time.  so we're gonna try and give you a chance to sit in our shoes,  and look at that world through our eyes, in the fog of war and uncertainty.  as we try to think through over the best choices we could make in that context.  and we'll try to explain what worked, what didn't,  what we got wrong, to try to create some lessons for the future.  and we try to lay out a playbook, a framework of tools and  things you can do to make these things less devastating in the future.  >> we're still not far from the time when the financial crisis happened.  and if you're not too young, it isn't hard to go around and talk to your friends and  talk to your family and hear how it affected them.  but it's remarkable how many people it had an effect on and  how many lives it changed.  in my particular case, it was really something very simple.  i had been a financial economist for many years and i was studying the standard  types of things like the stock market that financial economists study, and  my father was a senior executive at firm called bearstearns.  and in one week in march of 2008, bearstearns was in the news a lot and  i was talking to my father on the phone at the beginning of the week and  he said, don't worry we have $20 billion worth of liquidity, we'll be fine.  that was on a monday.  on a thursday i talked to him again and  he said, tomorrow morning we're gonna need to file for bankruptcy.  for me, this was just simply a remarkable thing.  how could an institution this large,  seemingly this awash in cash, go poof in a matter of days?  we understood bank runs.  this was the type of thing that had been around for a while.  but bearstearns wasn't a bank.  it was something called an investment bank.  it didn't have deposits.  how could it just go away in a matter of days?  after that happened, for me,  it was almost as though i was a medical doctor studying the flu.  and all of the sudden this new disease that i had never seen before afflicted  somebody in my family.  seemed just completely crazy and i needed to understand it.  and i started working on it and  over the next few months i was prepared to write and talk about how we just didn't  realize how fragile these types of investment banks were.  and we needed to think about how to prepare for  a case where they really would fail.  by september of 2008, that book was no longer necessary,  as the world well understood how dangerous it was, and  what the repercussions would be if a large investment bank failed.  if you talk to lots of people you'll hear many different stories  of how the financial crisis affected them and how they learned to think about it.  i know that in your case it was no big surprise.  you'd seen financial crises before many times earlier in your career.  >> yeah but they were happening to other countries.  and it's true that i spent most of my professional life in the treasury and  the imf and the fed, mostly involved in crises that were happening in japan,  emerging economies in asia and latin america.  so, i had some scars of experience from that.  but, what we faced in '07, '08, '09,  was nothing like what really anyone had seen since the great depression.  and that was part of the challenge.  because there was really no memory of what happens in the midst of panic.  there was no memory of what to do to protect people from panic.  no memory of how to break them.  no memory of how to arrest the runs, to convince people to stay.  and no memory of how to prevent panics from turning  into catastrophic depressions.  lot to learn from this though and lot of experience we can draw on today and  we're gonna try to communicate some of that experience.  >> so we'll see you soon.  >> [music] 
[music]  so, hypotheses one, hypotheses one is that overall it's bad behavior.  or, the more technical term for bd behavior, moral hazard, or  that it was an inside job.  what are the details of this?  so first, the mortgage demand in this case is coming from confused or  misled buyers, mortgages that eventually self-destructed.  so they aren't, have been intentionally misled, that's why they're confused.  we would have in this hypotheses the mortgage lenders pushing borrowers in to  mortgages that were wither not appropriate for them or not appropriate for anybody.  and doing that with sales techniques.  so, the sales techniques is designed to move these  borrowers in to loans that weren't appropriate for them.  the second component talks about mortgage supply.  so who's providing all of the money for these loans?  and now what's emphasized is that the financial intermediaries, the banks,  the mortgage brokers, are conflict-ridden.  and that they have no skin in the game.  so the typical story would be, well a mortgage broker just arranges the loan and  gets paid a commission.  never has to worry if the loan actually fails.  and a bank that provides the funds for  the loan is just going to resell the loan out immediately to somebody else, and  they're never going to get harmed if the loan doesn't perform well.  so that's where the mortgage supply comes from.  the whole process is then facilitated under hypotheses one by a revolving door.  people going from government to industry to the academic world and around and  around into circles.  and effectively what happens is when you're in government,  you pass the rules that are good for industry.  when you're in industry you take advantages of those rules.  and when you're in academic you write lots of articles saying that these rules  are very, very good while you're being paid by industry.  now that's kind of broadly how hypotheses one fits together.  hypotheses two emphasizes government failure.  not specific actors, not people who are in a revolving door, but  rather government itself and policies that may have been designed to promote  goals that we really like, but in the end, end up leading to crisis.  in this case the demand, the homeowner demand, for  housing that caused housing to go up.  comes from explicit and  implicit government subsidies trying to expand home ownership.  the clearest example of that is a tax deduction that you are allowed for  mortgage interest.  so if you had a mortgage in the united states and  you are itemizing your deductions on your tax return, then any interest  you pay on your mortgage, you can deduct from your income before you pay taxes.  this is actually a very, very large subsidy to taking out a mortgage  relative to, for example, renting.  so if you're considering the buy versus rent decision,  your rental payments just go to the landlord.  your purchase payments, you are allowed to deduct.  so these types of incentives are in fact quite strong and  have been in existence for a long time.  the mortgage supply, where we're getting all the money from,  here the government angle on it comes from the government sponsored enterprises.  and one thing that is often pointed to, is a law passed in 1992 that forced  the government sponsored enterprises to follow and to have fair housing goals.  so they would have goals to try to bring more lower income people into  becoming home owners.  and the idea there is well that pushed them to take on more risks and  to encourage more of what later became a huge surge in subprime lending.  so combine these two things, combine demand from the subsidies coming from  the deduction, mortgage interest deduction.  and the supply from the gses and their fair housing goals combine.  and they're facilitated in the end by ineffectual regulators.  so regulators who are supposed to be watching the banks,  who are supposed to be watching the gses, who just aren't doing their jobs,  and aren't noticing that all of this risk is building up.  furthermore, it's facilitated in the hypotheses two by the fact that the banks  themselves have an incentive to move things off of their balance sheet.  because they get different types of regulatory treatment if they have loans on  their balance sheet versus off their balance sheet.  so we have in the background supply and demand stories and  then we have right there, the watch dogs and of not doing their job right.  and sometimes setting rules that will force banks to do things or  incent banks to do things that make the world riskier.  hypotheses three is bubble thinking.  and here, again, we have a demand and a supply side and  then a overall facilitation that brings those two things together.  what does bubble thinking mean from the demand side?  demand is coming from consumers,  from homeowners who view houses as a great investment that never goes down in value.  and in fact, this is quite, this comes from survey evidence and  it certainly comes from  conversations that you can have with almost anybody considering buying a house.  really, it is very difficult to find somebody who when buying their house  thinks the value of their house will fall over time.  so sometimes people will think if they've read a lot of the evidence that,  okay their housing price should remain about stable.  and then they're living in their house and building up equity over time.  but most people will actually tell you that their house price is likely to rise.  in part, that comes from a little bit of a confusion that many of us have  the difference between real and nominal prices.  and nominal prices will just go up when inflation goes up.  and for a lot of our recent history,  there was inflation just making house prices go up.  whereas real prices require an appreciation relative to say the basket of  goods that you actually buy.  so if prices of goods and services go up at the same time as house price go up,  it's not an increase in real house prices.  nevertheless, it does make some sense for  people to think that when there's inflation, it's kind of good for  you as a homeowner, since typically you have a nominal mortgage.  and that nominal mortgage does not rise with inflation,  whereas your home value can.  nevertheless, the overall picture is consumers thinking  my house is going to go up in value over time.  now the supply side is the more interesting one.  because typically we think that the suppliers who ultimately are banks or  these large cash pools that we talked about in an earlier module.  of institutional investors who are ultimately buying packages of mortgages.  that they somehow should get this right more often than would consumers.  but in fact what we will see in the evidence is that, no,  that's not really true.  that even these types of intermediaries view mortgage-backed securities as  safe assets.  because the assumption is and  the assumption backed up by a lot of models that they will look at.  is that housing prices will never fall by very much.  and thus if you have this demand to have to hold safe assets either for  collateral reasons.  or just for your own investment portfolio,  then this housing based assets are a wonderful opportunity.  well then, hypotheses three needs a facilitating agent,  just as done hypotheses one and two.  why would bubble thinking matter, specifically at this particular time?  and here the explanation that is typically given and one, my colleague  at yale bob schiller has talked about this at length and shown evidence of this.  is that the bubble thinking is much more likely to happen  after a long period of stability.  and in the united states we had a long period of stability.  really since the great depression, there was not a major, major crisis.  we had recessions, but we had nothing that would make people  think that the entire financial system or housing system would collapse.  and the very long time that it had been, made this really ripe,  made it really possible.  just like if there's a very long time without any kind of epidemic or  any kind of disease.  people simply haven't built up immunity for it.  in this case we did not have immunity built up to prevent bubble thinking.  [music] 
[music]  >> asset-backed commercial paper programs grew rapidly in the 1990s and then again,  in the crucial global saving glut period from 2003 to 2007.  this picture shows the abcp outstanding, the total amount that at any point  in time, the total amount of commercial paper that is outstanding in the market.  we can see that the programs really didn't exist at all as we began the 1990s.  and the growth that begins in the late 1990s and  going through the early part of the 21st century coincides with  the time period where, as we recall from an earlier module.  the united states government is actually running surpluses and  decreasing the amount of safe government debt in existence.  well, if the government isn't doing it, it's nice if the private sector reacts and  starts to create some maturity transformation of safe assets of its own.  and by the time we reach the beginning of the 21st century,  there is approximately 600 billion of abcp outstanding.  the next large growth period happens in the global savings glut era  of 2003 to 2007.  and we see that the amount of abcp outstanding peaks  just before the bnp paribas announcement on august 8th of 2007,  at just over $1.2 trillion in commercial paper.  the collapse that we see following the bnp paribas announcement where,  overall, the market falls by the end  of 2011 to be significantly lower than it was at the turn of century.  there's really a precipitous fall that happened in the fourth quarter,  the end of the third quarter and the fourth quarter of 2007, and  that continued through 2008 and beyond.  effectively, people got nervous in ways that we will see shortly,  that some of these programs had exposures to the type  of sub-prime securities that bnp paribas, themselves, did not know how to value.  so again, a large sophisticated financial institution  can't figure out what these things are worth.  if i'm an investor in commercial paper that has a 90 day term, and  i don't know for sure whether or not this particular program has invested in those  types of sub-prime bonds, then i might just choose to not re-up.  to not roll over the loan that i have made, and  to take my short term investment elsewhere.  that is in fact what we will see happen.  now at this time at the peak, abcp programs took many forms, and  were not dominated by any particular type of sponsor.  in the very detailed table that gives us  some information about the types of sponsors.  so the sponsor of an asset-backed commercial paper program can be either  an individual institution, or a set of institutions that band together.  to figure out a way to take things from their balance sheet  that might be long term, bundle them together, use them as collateral, and  then issue short term debt.  the most popular types of programs are in the top left corner.  these are multi-seller programs where more than one institution gets together and  does exactly that of bundling.  we see that there are other types, depending on whether or  not it is dominated by mortgages or non-mortgages, and  in fact, the non mortgage type was quite popular.  whether or not it is existing independent of an institution,  that's a structured investment vehicle.  and along the top, we see the different types of programs.  whether or not a large bank is involved, whether or  not there is formal credit support, etc.  overall, many of these cells, and this is really the most important  part about this table, many of these cells are filled and none of them are dominant.  so that in fact,  this was a business that many types of institutions were engaged in.  and they were engaged in with a variety of different techniques.  [music] 
[music]  the precipitous drop in the amount of asset-backed commercial paper outstanding  that we saw in the figure in the previous lesson, going to recall it a run.  it's a run on asset-backed commercial paper programs  just like you can have a run on a bank.  a run on a bank is when suddenly, the depositors in that bank decide  i'm not sure if the bank is gonna be able to pay us back.  the bank has long-term assets,  like the mortgage loans that it has made but short-term liabilities.  and if the total value of those assets is not the total value of those liabilities,  then they won't be able to pay me or any depositor back.  so, i'm gonna go to that bank, i'm gonna take my money out.  an asset-backed commercial paper program has a run  that goes pretty much the same way.  the program itself has assets,  often securitized bonds that it has purchased, and  it has liabilities, which are short-term, not demand deposit, perhaps, 90 day paper.  so when my paper comes due, when i'm asked to take  the 90 day loan that i've made and just re-up, roll it over it is called.  the simplest thing for me to do if i am nervous  about the underlying solvency of the program is to say, no thank you.  a formal definition of this is given in an important paper by covitz,  liang, and suarez, three economists at the federal reserve board.  who define an asset-backed commercial paper run specifically as  a week when the program does not issue any new commercial paper,  despite the fact that at least 10% of the outstanding commercial paper  currently in the program has matured.  so we observe a program has a certain amount of commercial paper.  at least 10% of it is coming due, typically, what you do would be roll that  paper but we don't observe that they've issued any commercial paper.  that would make it appear that they're unable to roll it.  now this won't be a perfect definition but  it's gonna capture almost all of the cases that we care about.  what covitz, liang and suarez show is that these runs became endemic in august 2007.  and that once a program experienced a run, once there was a week  where it was not issuing commercial paper, even though it had appears that some of  their commercial paper had expired, they are unlikely to ever leave that state.  it's unlikely to see them ever issue anything else.  by december 2007, more than 40% of the programs were in a run state.  here's a picture that shows that.  the fraction of all asset-backed commercial paper programs  that are experiencing runs.  this number is not zero in the pre-anxiety period and  that's just because the measure that they have is not perfect.  it's a somewhat coarse measure.  occasionally, a program, even when it's healthy, might not issue even though it  would appear that they're having some of their commercial paper expire.  think of that as a baseline level of about 5%, or  less than 5%, that really aren't runs.  but everything else above that, starting in august,  as the line increases very rapidly, are actual runs.  now this doesn't happen to all programs and it doesn't happen to all programs  right away because not all programs had any possible exposure to subprime.  there are some programs that very explicitly said,  all we're going to buy are things that have nothing to do with mortgages.  those programs generally should stay safe.  but if you're involved in anything where there's uncertainty about whether or  not there is any subprime bonds in your portfolio,  then you were in danger of the run.  the more jagged line tells us that if you are in a run in the previous week,  what is your probability of actually leaving the runs state?  you can see this is pretty high in the early years and  that's because the run states, again, are probably not real run states.  but once we hit august 2007, and the programs that are unable to issue debt or  that do not issue debt really are in real trouble,  we see it becomes very unlikely for those programs to actually exit.  so, once you have entered the run state, that is usually it.  you are not going to be issuing more commercial paper.  what happens, then, to these programs?  if they're unable to roll them, then they must call upon the liquidity support,  the promise, the backup lines of credit,  which are very often from banks, and from their sponsoring banks.  so think for a moment about what this means.  looking now at the total amount of asset-backed commercial paper outstanding.  by the end of 2007, it's down approximately $350 billion  from it's peak just before bnp paribas, 1.2 trillion at it's peak,  and then down by the end of 2007 by about 350 billion.  so where does all of that debt go?  these securities are still owned.  the asset-backed commercial paper programs still have all of this stuff and  still need to finance it somewhere.  but, no longer can they finance it with unsecured borrowings  by the programs themselves.  instead, the liquidity support providers,  most often the banks, need to start lending the money themselves.  where do they get it?  they get it either from the interbank markets, which as we know are stressed and  are now charging 50 to 100 basis points higher than they did pre-bnp partibas.  or they have to take the actual collateral and  send it out into the market as a collateralized loan of some kind.  either way, there is pressure now on financial institutions which  used to be receiving a source of funding largely from money market mutual funds and  other lenders that are restricted to only purchasing short term debt.  and they now need to run into the markets to find a place,  to find a source of financing, either secured or unsecured, that is different.  that's what we mean when we say there is pressure on interbank markets.  and we can quantify that pressure here as  being approximately $350 billion  worth over the last few months of 2007.  [music] 
[music]  in addition to the large drop in the size of the market, something that has  often gone unnoticed, or at least not sufficiently commented upon,  is what happened to the maturity of new issues in the market.  so how long the programs that were able to borrow,  how long were they able to borrow for?  this picture, also taken from the covitz, liang, and  suarez paper, helps to illustrate this.  so prior to the runs of august 2007 and forward,  the average maturity of a new commercial paper issue hovered around 30 days,  though sometimes longer, sometimes shorter.  but 30 days would be the average maturity time.  now we know that many programs were unable to roll their  paper beginning in august of 2007.  but even ones that were saw the amount of time they were able to borrow for  shrink tremendously.  so in fact in the earliest scary period of august 2007 it  fell by more than half to less than 15 days on average before  recovering somewhat still below the levels that it had before bmp paribas.  so think about what this means not only is it the case that far fewer programs  are able to borrow but the ones that are still in the market are perceived as being  risky enough that investors don't think it's really safe to lend them for  30 days or for 90 days.  but rather much shorter time periods.  this is a fragility that is building up over the system.  and it's a fragility that builds up not just in asset backed commercial paper but  in many other places.  as we will see in modules to come there is a shortening of maturities.  there is no longer the case that we have 30 days or 60 days or 90 days.  but a lot of things start to move towards two weeks, one week, or even overnight.  that means that even small, scary things that happen in the market can have very,  very rapid effects.  that will be part of the story of the intensifying part of the panic phase of  the crisis.  not only does the maturity of the new issues fall but  the programs that are still able to issue  at even shorter maturities have to pay higher risk spreads.  here's another picture from that same paper.  so typically we have very small spreads.  less than ten basis points prior to bnp paribas.  this is relative to a risk free rate.  so these are really seen as something very, very close to being risk free.  now, even though we have censored this market by not allowing many  of the traditional issuers to issue any more commercial paper.  40% are now out of the market and we are shortening the maturity so it will be for  a shorter time.  we see that premium must get paid now, that cycle around somewhere  around 50 basis points but bopping as high as just below one percentage point.  so summarize what happens here,  in the asset-backed commercial paper market $350 billion  of investment funds have disappeared and effectively banks need to cover them.  for the asset-backed commercial paper that continues to be financed,  it's financed at a shorter maturity.  so we have more of a rollover risk than we used to and a higher rate is being paid.  the rate on asset backed commercial paper has jumped just as the rate on other  unsecured borrowing by banks has jumped.  this again, is what we call pressure in interbank markets.  [music] 
[music]  let's take a look at what the abx was doing in that first half of 2007.  this is the abx 2006-1 series for bbb ratings.  so read the left hand side, the basis points axis,  along the y axis, as telling us the blue line.  this is the spread that you get, this is the risk premium that you get if you  are willing to insure against default the bbb tranche.  which is just slightly above the barrier for not being investment grade.  we're going to try to understand just how much are you getting paid for  your willingness to insure against this risk.  going through 2006, this was pretty much between 100 and  200 basis points the entire year.  that is not shown on this picture.  instead the picture begins on january 1st,  2007 where we are at the steady level that we've been throughout the previous year.  so the 2006-1 series, which recall represents subprime securitizations,  that were done, that closed, in the last six months of 2005.  it would cost between one and 200 basis points to ensure and  this last through out most of january, but towards the end of january  we start to see this creeping up through january and then through february,  until it peaks towards the end of february at over 700 basis points.  so, by the end of february we already have a very, very significant,  this is an enormous rise.  think about this as more than five, more than five and a half percent,  550 basis points increase in what it would cost to insure yourself against  the default of the bbb tranche of securitizations written in 2005.  really at this point,  much of the value of these bonds has been destroyed, of the bbb level.  this insurance level actually falls a little bit,  falling back down to about 400 basis points in march.  before rising slightly to about 500 basis points around  the time of new centuries bankruptcy filing in early april.  the bear stearns funds which suspended redemptions in june of 2007,  are also the time of a slight increase.  but we never see this number really go any higher than it was at that point in  february of 2007.  so there's not a whole lot of information that the market really gets about  the triple b tranches between february and june.  we have these events in bear stearns and new century.  but they're not really causing any big movements in the abx.  they're more reacting to the pressure in the abx that has  existed since the beginning of february.  another way to look at this is with what it costs to insure the aaa tranche.  so these are supposed to be super, super safe.  and throughout all of 2006, which is not shown in this picture.  it's the first year that this abx 2006 was trading,  it's less than 25 basis points for this insurance.  notably throughout january, even during the time that the bbb tranche,  which we saw on the previous picture, was rising.  aaa was still perceived to be safe, but by the end of february we see a spike,  and that spike takes this insurance from 25 basis points to 45 basis points,  so in total shift this scale here is far, far smaller than the previous scale.  so looking again at the previous scale, you see that we're running from 100 basis  points, between 100 and 200 basis points, all the way up to 700 basis points.  so the y axis has a very broad range.  for aaa, while we do have some surprise and we're going from something that seems  extremely safe, less than 25 basis points to almost 45 basis points in february.  that continues to creep down and  we're back down even at the end of june to something that is below 30 basis points,  effectively indistinguishable from where we were at the beginning of the year.  despite the fact that new century and  the bear stearns funds events happened during this time period.  so there's a sense that, yes, subprime has a problem.  that problem is mostly in the lower-rated tranches of subprime.  the aaa tranches, the part that are held very broadly by financial institutions,  still appear to be not hugely at risk as we hit the middle of 2007.  okay going to the last half of 2007, the bbb rated tranches  continue to deteriorate and this is a fairly steady deterioration.  the bnp paribas event on august 9th really doesn't play any role here.  bnp paribas is reacting to past changes in what has happened to subprime.  it's not causing anything that's going forward, and  in fact, when we do see the resumption of the increase in the spreads,  it's about one month later, after bmp paribas.  and we reach a peak of 4000 basis points.  so the scale here is even bigger than what it was in the first half of the year.  by the time bnp paribas makes their announcement,  we're already at almost 2,000 basis point spread.  this is effectively something that people expect to not pay off.  the changes that come after that are really minor changes in the overall price  of these bonds and the protection is just flying completely off the scale.  nobody is expecting by this time that bbb tranches  of subprime securitizations are going to have any significant payoffs.  how about if we look at triple a?  starting in june when we were at 45 basis points, we now start to see that  over the summer months, prior to the bnp parabis announcement.  there's starting to become a strong belief in the market that these  aaa traunches of the securitizations are not themselves safe any more.  this is a big deal.  aaa is really different than bbb in the sense that  nobody dedicates resources to studying what's going to happen in aaa.  aaa we assume to be safe.  and once it's not safe, we just get out of it.  we are just worried.  the spread here rises to  higher than 150 basis points prior to the announcement at bnp paribas.  you can think of this as being a precipitating factor  in bnp paribas saying, we don't know how to value these securities.  that does fall slightly was we go through the remainder of the third  quarter of 2007, but then in the fourth quarter of 2007,  it becomes clear that the problems, even in the triple a tranches, are severe.  and in fact it costs over 350 bases points in order to be able to insure them,  that is the premium that you get on triple a.  so by the time we reach november, december of 2007,  it is quite clear that these problems are going to reach the vary  seemingly safest part of the sub-prime market.  [music] 
[music]  to track what is going on in the subprime market and to understand what  the market knew, what market participants knew in 2007 we're  gonna look at a very specific index, and this index is called the abx.  asset backed and then x which just stands generically for index.  the abx has many different types.  tracking many different types of securities.  the specific one that we will look at is the abx-he which stands for home equity.  but really just people refer to it as the abx because it was by far  the most popular.  it's an index of credit default swaps, the acronym there being cds,  written on subprime mortgage securitizations.  the price of the abx index is essentially a measure of the perceived value of  subprime securities with various ratings.  or the return, or spread, on the abx,  as it's sometimes quoted, is essentially a risk premium for subprime.  the details of how the abx is constructed are not crucially important for  what we're going to do.  really all you have to know is there are many  firms out there that are writing insurance on subprime securitizations.  so somebody bundles together a whole bunch of subprime loans,  sells it out into the market.  and then if somebody wants to write insurance, wants to say,  well how will i be protected if there is actually default on these bonds, then  there are various financial institutions that will write that type of insurance.  and what the abx does is average those prices across all the different dealers  and tell you this is how much it costs to insure in a sub prime market.  and they do this for  five different ratings from triple a down to triple b for the securities.  so what we can do when we look at an abx index is just get a sense of what  the market thinks about the riskiness is of sub prime securitizations.  of securities that are collateralized by subprime mortgage loans.  the index was created by a firm called markit.  and it was first released in january 2006, covering the 20 largest  subprime securitizations that closed in the last six months of 2005.  so the abx-he2006-1, which is a mouthful.  is the abx home equity index that was first released in the first month of 2006.  based on securitizations that had taken place over the previous six months.  so when you look at what's going on in the 2006-1abx.  you're getting a sense for what the market thinks of securitizations of sub prime  mortgages that were written in the last six months of 2005.  subsequent releases were denoted 2006-2, which are, which came out in july of 2006,  and took the 20 largest securitizations from the first six months of 2006.  the 2007-1, which covered the last six months of 2006,  and the 2007-2, which covered the first six months of 2007.  at that point, subprime activity really slowed down tremendously,  and it was simply too small for any further index construction.  but what made the abx really interesting is that all of a sudden everybody  could see.  because there was a public price what the market thought about subprime.  so in 2005 there is really no way to do it unless you talk to somebody who themselves  was looking very carefully at default and was writing the cds protection.  this is not a public number.  now we have a public number.  the wall street journal can write about it.  all market participants even if they're not specialized in this area  can learn what's going on in sub prime.  so this in some sense enables us to track the market's  expectations in a way that we could not do before.  [music] 
[music]  the next domino to fall after money market mutual funds was  the american international group, which is a large insurance company that  had taken to insuring a wide variety of things including structured products.  the main weaknesses that aig had going into this weak were first,  that the market that they were involved in for  insurance of structured products was the credit-default-swap market.  and effectively, all this is, is an insurance product.  it has a fancy name of cds.  but really what they were doing is they were just as the monolines did  before them.  they would take on positions that were effectively promising if  something goes wrong with your securities, with your asset back securities,  your mortgage back securities, your collateralized debt obligations,  any of those fancy three letter acronyms, then we will pay you for it.  we will insure that.  it's effectively what a credit default swap is.  so as these markets are deteriorating, aig is accumulating losses, investment losses,  or if you want, insurance losses, just as they would if there was a hurricane and  they had insured a lot of properties where the hurricane hit.  furthermore, aig was involved in a variety of other financial services businesses.  one of which was, they had a fair, they would have cash.  they would have cash, and they would invest some of that cash.  they would invest some of that cash in securities lending.  so, in the end, what they would end up doing when they made those investments and  security lending is, they would take losses on some of those securities.  like all institutions that were engaged in, the markets for structured products at  this time, they were receiving funding pressures in commercial paper and in repo.  the same way bear stearns did six months earlier, and  the same way that lehman brothers was at this time.  a further thing that hurt aig very badly is that  insurance companies receive an enormous amount of their, can create an enormous  amount of their value from the fact that they have very, very high credit ratings.  so part of what we do when we go in as an insurance company and  promise that we'll pay things back is we rely on the fact  that the credit rating agencies have said that we were a very good risk.  well, at this time, aig was downgraded.  it was downgraded for very good reasons.  but in the contracts that they have, the insurance contracts that they have,  required that they come up with additional collateral when they were downgraded.  this would be a very natural thing to put into a contract.  imagine if you had insurance and you knew you were gonna need to make some kind of  claims, and all of a sudden the insurance company that was going to have to pay you  your claims gets downgraded by the credit rating agencies.  it would be really good if you had in the contract, well,  if you've become riskier and you owe me money, i expect you to put  up a little more collateral before i'm gonna make my actual claim.  aig had many contracts like this.  and so, they were forced to come up with a whole load of cash  in the time leading up to their eventual rescue.  furthermore, they had something called liquidity puts.  a put is a type of option that gives the holder the option the right  to sell a security back to the writer of that option.  aig had written liquidity puts on structured products on cdos collaterolized  debt obligations, which said, well, you, the buyer, you the buyer of this  contract from us, if you decide that you want to just hand it back to us you can.  and all of a sudden, they're forced to come up with cash to buy these types of  securities that they don't wanna hold, in the first place.  all of these things led to an enormous cash drain on aig.  and on september 12th, this is the friday, just leading into lehman weekend,  there was a meeting at the new york federal reserve going on at the same time  that they were scrambling to understand what was happening at lehman brothers.  after the meeting, market turned significant turmoil, and  it's clear that while they were looking at some point on september 12th at some kind  of private rescue, no such private rescue is going to be possible.  there simply aren't deep pocketed investors out there who could come in and  provide the kind of capital and liquidity necessary for aig to survive.  the federal reserve led a rescue, first $85 billion,  later supplemented by more from the federal reserve and  from the tarp funds, the troubled asset relief funds.  [music] 
[music]  on may 17, 2007, chairman ben bernanke of the federal reserve  gave a speech about the sub-prime housing market.  and in that speech, he spoke about the relationship between sub-prime and  the overall financial market.  it's an important enough speech that it's worth just reading one paragraph  from it and here it is "given the fundamental factors in place that should  support the demand for housing, we belive the effect of the troubles in the subprime  sector of the broader housing market will likely be limited, and  we do not expect significant spillover from the subprime market  to the rest of the economy or to the financial system.  this clearly turns out after the fact to be wrong.  that the weakness in subprime did infect the rest of the system.  and a big, big question, really perhaps the most important question for  understanding the financial crisis and for being able to predict and  prevent the next one is why did that happen.  why was there a sector, that while it was important,  while trillions of dollars had been written, overall the amount of  expected loss as it this point was in the hundreds of billions of dollars.  that's what chairman bernanke and his analyst saw.  and hundreds of billions of dollars of losses really should be able to be  absorbed by the financial system.  what was it, that took this large but controllable loss,  for the financial system, and turned it into a full blown financial crisis?  so there are several factors and the first thing that happened was that  there was anxiety that spread through the market.  and that anxiety spread through a variety of channels.  the bad news in subprime was well known by the time of chairman bernanke's  speech in the recent lesson in this module, we looked at the pictures, and  we saw that the abx, the index of credit default swaps on subprime securitizations,  particularly for the triple b securities, had already really  increased its spreads tremendously by may of 2007.  and there was some notion that there was some problem in triple a,  although not nearly as severe as in the triple b trudge.  nevertheless, we realize that there is some problem in subprime.  but that shouldn't be enough.  what actually happens here, and where the problems begin to affect  the financial system, is the uncertainty about the location of the risk?  which securitized bonds are exposed to subprime.  which financial institutions would need,  like bear sterns did to support their investment vehicles.  instead of knowing that we have a certain size risk and knowing exactly where it is,  we knew we had a certain size risk, but we weren't sure exactly where it is.  fundamentally, the financial system is not equipped to analyze safe investments.  investments that you think are safe,  the dollar bills in your pocket, the deposits that you have in the bank.  nobody has dedicated resources, not even large financial institutions,  for analyzing whether or not those things are true.  consider what you would do if you had uninsured deposits at.  the bank, this was the situation everybody was in  prior to deposit insurance in the united states which came about in the 1930s.  and the situation that some people who have a lot of money in the bank  that exceeds the insurance limit of the fdic still have today.  suppose you became nervous about the solvency of your bank.  you didn't know wether the bank could actually give you your money back  if you waited.  what should you do?  should you go, get all of the bank's financial information, roll it out on your  kitchen table, analyze it, talk to analysts from all over the world,  or should you go to the bank and take your money out?  it is clearly rational, for virtually everybody, in every situation,  to go to the bank and take their money out, rather than engage in some long,  complicated analysis of whether or not your bank is solvent.  that actually is the case across many different parts of the financial system.  it is not just individuals who put their money in a bank who should run,  if they suddenly think there might be a problem.  it's also people who have money in subprime securitizations,  perhaps, hundreds of millions of dollars of these bonds,  that have been invested in by a small staff,  because that small staff is not designed to try to figure out small differences.  they're designed to just put money in something that looks like a bank.  and if they get nervous about it,  they're not gonna analyze everything they're simply not equipped to do that.  they don't have the resources, the financial system has not been set up to do  it and they should just sell and get out of that type of investment that they have.  an analogy to this has been made  very forcefully by my colleague gary gorton at yale.  and what gary talks about is you can think about what's happening in the early  stages of a financial crisis the same way that you can think about what happens  in the early stages of a food scare.  so say you hear on the news that there is e-coli that has been  discovered in hamburger meat somewhere in your state.  and you don't know whether or not that.  e-coli infection is actually all over the place,  in hamburger meat all over your state.  what's the rational thing to do?  should you purchase a hamburger, bring it home and  do all kinds of scientific tests on it?  or should you decide that this is a pretty good day to have a salad?  mostly, you would decide this is a pretty good day to have a salad.  you're not equipped to do the scientific analysis that you'd need to do.  and that is basically the same situation that we're in  when all fo a sudden a very simple act like having a hamburger or  taking your money out of the bank has become complicated.  the parts of the financial system that are set up to do complex analysis are set up  to do them on types of securities that we know can move up or down a lot in a day.  particularly stocks.  stock analysts are used to news coming out,  changing the behavior of the prices of the underlying securities, and  they have large teams of people who are set up to do that analysis.  bond investors and triple a securities are not.  and in fact, that's the whole point of triple a securities.  and that is the whole point of the types of safe assets that we discussed in  an earlier module.  we would like to have something that is simple, that we don't have to dedicate  a lot of informational resources to use, and once it is no longer simple,  we have something that starts to look like a good old-fashioned run on a bank.  [music] 
[music]  what we saw in the previous lesson,  was a summary of what went on overall in the financial system.  bnp paribas's announcement created enormous amount of anxiety.  that anxiety led to pressure.  on the inter-bank markets that lasted for the 13 months,  between bnp pariba and the fall of lehman.  and then, after the bankruptcy of lehman brothers in september of 2008,  there was an all out run on the banking system.  now, that's the picture but the overall story seems to be missing several steps.  how is it that the pressure on the inter-bank system,  can lead to a failure of such a large organization as lehman?  there are a few steps between the middle of august of 2007 and september of 2008,  that require us to go a little more deeply into the types of  financial activity that had gone on during the global savings glut.  the type of growth in the shadow banking system,  the growth in the creation of safe assets, and how those safe assets slowly  began to collapse, until they very quickly collapsed in september 2008.  our first case study for this,  is a market called abcp, or asset backed commercial paper.  and we'll begin with an introduction to what asset backed commercial paper is,  and then, see how the collapse of the asset-backed commercial paper market  contributed to the movement from anxiety to all-out panic.  asset-backed commercial paper is primarily a method of maturity transformation.  that is, a way to fund a pool of long-term assets with short-term liabilities.  if you recall from an earlier module, we talked at length about how  europeans institutions engaged in enormous amount of maturity transformation.  they had demands from their own investors.  that they would satisfy to give short-term liquid assets.  and those short-term liquid assets  would effectively be funded by long-term things on the balance sheet.  this type of maturity transformation is, basically, what banks do, and  what banks have done historically.  so, a bank that holds on its balance sheet, mortgage debt  that won't mature fully for 30 years, and that's what it has as assets.  and issues as liabilities demand deposits that can be taken out any day,  is engaging in maturity transformation.  it has long maturity assets and short maturity liability.  asset backed commercial paper does the same thing, but off the balance sheet.  so, it will hold assets that might have fairly long maturities, and  it will issue liabilities that are much shorter.  asset backed commercial paper is designed to meet specific needs of investors.  often, these investors are money market mutual funds.  and it will include various enhancements for credit and  liquidity, so it can meet those specific goals.  for example, a money market mutual fund,  which prior to on the eve of the crisis in september of 2008,  money market mutual funds had $4 trillion of assets in the united states.  this is individuals, institutions, other large pools of cash that have given  their money to a specific type of mutual fund that is under very strict rules for  the types of investments that it's allowed to make.  it's only allowed to make investments that are short term.  so, what happens is the money market mutual fund  needs to have a lot of short term investments.  and if there aren't enough short-term investments in the world,  then a financial intermediary grows up, buys a lot of long-term investments, and  then issues short-term paper that can be held by the money market mutual funds.  so, a form of creation.  it is the manufacturing of a short-term asset.  here's a picture, of which not every one of the boxes is crucial to understand.  the big circle in the middle is the asset-backed commercial paper conduit.  so, this is a legal entity.  this legal entity is going to be buying and  selling assets that is coming from the sellers on the top.  and is going to issuing short term debt,  which is the oval, the abcp investors on the bottom.  so, there's simply the creation of an intermediary, the intermediary will hold,  for example, triple a rated, subprime bonds.  it will hold those.  it is entitled to buy them and sell them.  and what it will issue in return is, for example, 90 day paper, 90 day debt.  so, the bonds themselves don't mature for perhaps years.  but the debt needs to be rolled over every 90 days.  to ensure, that the conduit itself is safe, they will take  the rectangle over on the left, which is a credit enhancement provider.  so, somebody will guarantee the credit of the abcp.  so, someone else is standing behind them.  and over on the right, a liquidity provider, often a bank,  that is giving them a backup line of credit, so  that if the investors refuse to roll over their short term debt,  the back will provide that, and enable them to pay back the old investors.  it looks similar in some ways conceptually to securitization.  which we studied in an earlier module.  there are some important differences.  the first difference is that investments done by an abcp  vehicle can be revolving and fluctuate in size.  recall that a securitized vehicle is going to say exactly what they are buying  right at the beginning, and then there is no agency, there are no decisions  that are made by the securitized vehicle.  abcp is different, it can buy and sell.  the conduits, the abcp vehicles themselves,  may invest in various asset types.  typically, in securitization, you will be just in mortgage debt or  just in student loans or just in auto loans.  an abcp vehicle can be in a variety of things.  they typically engaged as we've discussed in maturity transformation.  that is they will have a long term assets and they will have short term liabilities.  in contrast, securitized bonds are designed so that overall, they pay  out at the same rate that they are being paid themselves from the underlying bonds.  so, there's a pooling aspect, and there is the elimination of agency risk aspect  in securitizations, but there is typically not maturity transformation.  finally, there's no schedule to amortization of assets and liabilities.  a pool of securitized bonds is designed so that,  over time, it pays itself out completely.  an abc pv vehicle can last in perpetuity.  there is no reason that it can't continue rolling over its debt forever.  individual investors are not in forever.  they're only in for us long as they've loaned money to the vehicle.  but the vehicle, itself,  is not designed to end at any specific time.  [music] 
[music]  to understand how problems in this small little sector of the economy,  of bond insurers, of the monoline insurance companies,  can end up having real economic effects, which is the type of  thing that happened in many different places, as different parts of the shadow  banking system collapsed, effect that it had on the real economy.  to go into detail into a somewhat unusual type of security  that had a very large market as we started rolling through the anxiety period  of the global financial crisis.  and that market is in something called auction rate securities, which are often,  just go by their acronym of ars.  to see why we have auction rate securities we have to understand what  the problem is with normal securities.  and the traditional way to solve normal securities would be you have a primary  offering, an investment bank gathers together all of the debt for  example that needs to be sold, finds investors, and  then afterwards would manage a secondary market.  so if there's a small municipality or a medium sized municipality, say,  new haven, connecticut, where i am standing, that needs to borrow.  new haven can go to a investment bank.  the investment bank will try to arrange, say $100 million bond offering.  needs to find investors for that.  and then, after those investors buy those bonds, the investment bank will stand  ready to sometimes transact and help to find a seller or  to find a buyer for anybody who has bonds and wants to sell them.  now, the problem with this mechanism is that $100 million,  while it's a lot for individual people, is not a lot for  institutions, and it doesn't make for a very thick market with a lot of trade.  so, anybody who might be looking to buy some of these new haven  bonds to start with might be worried about their inability to get out of it and  to sell it later, if they wanted to.  so, these illiquid secondary markets can make it very,  very difficult to sell the bonds in the first place.  we have a little bit of a chicken and egg problem.  nobody wants to buy them because they're afraid they won't be able to get out  of them later.  auction rate securities are a solution to this illiquidity.  so instead of an investment bank just saying,  i'm gonna sell this new haven debt at one time, and  then later if you need some help we'll try to find match up buyers and sellers.  what they promise to do instead is to have periodic auctions.  so come in every month, for example, and we will give you the opportunity to  place bids and offers on this particular debt.  it's a lot like having a specific  time where everybody shows up to sell their wares.  a town market that might happen every time on saturday.  everyone knows if you show up on this particular day,  that's when you can buy and sell.  the same thing works for securities.  makes it much simpler for buyers and  sellers to get together if we know there's a certain time to show up.  and these periodic auctions will also reset  the interest rates on the underlying debt.  now what makes this work even better is that the broker dealers, who are worried  about their reputation, will provide a backstop to the market in normal times.  they will hold paper to manage short term liquidity disruptions,  knowing that there'll be another auction the following week when they can sell it.  so for example, if a broker dealer or investment bank was  managing an auction for new haven municipal securities, then what they would  do is if somebody really wanted to sell their new haven municipal securities and  there was an auction that was happening each month, then the broker dealer might  take some of those securities into their inventory at the time of the auction,  if there were no particular buyers at that time.  and then in the next month get the word out to their clients that there's  actually inventory available.  and then there would be buyers who would come to the next auction and  they would be able to unload that inventory.  the broker dealer takes that risk on for that period between auctions, but  gets the reputational value of standing behind the sales that they had made.  one would not expect a backstop like this to work in all times.  certainly, there will be times when the broker dealers themselves  have much more important uses for their funds than to backstop these auctions.  but historically, when we weren't in a financial crisis, they were willing and  able to do that.  these types of securities are used,  these types of auctions are used for quiet types of securities.  municipal bonds being the main type,  student loan pools being another type that was very popular.  so these are really not subprime types of things.  they're things that are needed for ordinary functioning of the economy.  the municipal securities, as we discussed in the previous lesson,  were given credit enhancement by the mono-lines.  and that brings us to our oh moment.  which is at some point it became clear to the market that these particular  securities did not enjoy the protection, the credit enhancement from the insurers  that everybody thought they did six months before, eight months before.  because the bond insurers that had been in the quiet business of insuring  municipalities for all these years, was now also in the business of insuring  structure rate products and people didn't think they were solvent anymore.  so it used to be the case that if you were a small municipality with perhaps a bbb  rating of your own, and you now had the credit enhancement from a bond insurer,  which made it aaa, suddenly that bond insurer was gone.  now, the folks who were holding onto your debt, who thought they had a aaa piece  of debt, this might be a bbb piece of debt now, because there's no more insurance.  and so they would like to now get out of it.  in a world without auction rate securities they would really be stuck.  they would have to hold onto it.  but in a world of auction rate securities, they come and they bring it back  to the auctions hoping that the investment banks will stand behind and  take it back onto their inventory.  well, let's see what happened.  this picture shows us what was going on in terms of auctions and the failure of  these auctions, in other words, not enough buyers showing up and the investment  banks not taking on all of the debt that the sellers were bringing to the auctions.  and we begin, beginning of 2008, and on january 22  we have lehman brothers, doing the very, very first failed auction.  so they failed to come and buy all of the pieces of their auction.  over the subsequent few weeks, auctions continued to succeed, and  then beginning in early february, we start to see an increasing amount of failures.  a failure meaning,  somebody comes to the auction, says i would like to sell this debt.  there are no buyers that show up, and the broker-dealer, that in normal times had  been buying these securities, decides this is not a good use for our money any more.  the broker-dealer is not contractually obligated to buy it,  just reputational concerns kept them doing it in the past.  and at this point, they have larger problems than the reputational concerns.  we see that more than 80% of these auctions are actually failing  by mid-february, settling down to about 60% going forward.  and this is falling predominantly on the extra costs that happen here.  because the way this works in the system is that when the auctions fail,  the borrowers, the municipalities being most important in this case,  have to pay a higher interest rate.  so we start from the subprime failure, we move in the next step  towards bond insurers running out of money and losing their credit rating, and we end  up with small municipalities suddenly having to pay higher interest rate costs.  a direct effect going that has seemingly to a place  that might have no subprime at all.  it could be a city that hasn't seen a single subprime sale, but  they've been captured in this maelstrom of the meltdown.  [music] 
[music]  let's examine the evidence for hypothesis one.  overall, the evidence does not support the hypothesis of bad behavior or  moral hazard as the main driver of the housing crisis.  the first reason is that nonprime loans,  which really are at the center of this story that we've people,  confused people, misled people into taking out nonprime loans.  actually, these loans performed very well for many years,  it wasn't until the crisis that these loans really started to look very bad.  does look like people looking at the historical evidence about these loans  would not have thought that they were designed to fail.  let's take a look at some evidence on this.  these figures are drawn from a paper by foote, gerardi, and  willen who were three economists at the federal reserve, who did some  outstanding work in gathering up data and evidence on the housing crisis.  each of these pictures is really showing us the same set of statistics for  different subsets of mortgages.  what we have in blue is the rate at which these loads are failing,  so that they end up with houses in foreclosure or in delinquency.  and in red is the number of originations.  looking at all mortgages, where the borrowers have fico scores,  which are credit scores, below 620.  this is typically used as a cutoff for when we label something as subprime loan.  we go back to 2000 on the x-axis, and you can see that from 2000 to 2004,  the failure rate for subprime mortgages is below 20% and is actually falling.  now whether or not you think this is a big number, it's a number that had been,  this particular failure rate had been around for a while.  and if you frame it as almost 20% are failing,  that sounds like a lot of failure.  if you frame it as more than 80% of the people who took out these loans,  who would not otherwise have been able to get home loans were successful  in being able to pay off their mortgage, that sounds a lot better.  and so, the way that you frame, of course, success or failure here is important.  but let's emphasize just the statistics which is that this was a stable or  declining percentage until 2005, 2006 where it starts to go up.  now the originations, looking down below,  start to accelerate during the first half of the gsg period.  the originations are going up at a very fast rate starting in 2003.  the failure rates are going down.  if you were standing in 2005 thinking about taking out such a loan, or thinking  about making such a loan, and you looked at the evidence, the evidence looks like,  wow, this is actually a product that is doing relatively well and certainly even  doing a little bit better over time as we increase the amount of loans that we make.  okay, the other three figures here are just showing us  different slices of the population, different slices of the loans.  loans that have ltv equal 100.  this is a loan to value equals 100%.  no money down loans.  and if you look at no money down loans, they're not nearly as  large as subprime originations in terms of the red line, the number of originations.  but here again, we can see the failure rate is around 10% and does not move.  it does not move until we hit the bad part of the crises  starting in late 2005, early 2006.  these are loans that have, they're called low doc or  no doc, which means very little documentation.  so, somebody is going and they say their income is something, but  they have no documentation for their income.  they have no w2s, for example.  the number of originations of low doc or no doc loans also explodes  during the global savings glut period beginning in 2002, 2003.  we see that on the origination line.  but if you look at failure rates,  the failure rates once again are relatively low.  so they are below 10% in 2000, and  they fall during the period of time when the number of originations is exploding.  now, of course, the failure rates are going to be low here.  the failure rates are going to be low during this time because housing  prices are going up.  when housing prices are going up, people don't tend to not pay their mortgage.  it's easy to refinance your mortgage, for example.  but again,  right now focused just on the evidence if one only looks at the failure rates and  tries to correlate that with what's going on in the market, things look good.  things do not look as though they were particularly unsafe at all.  in fact, they look to be improving.  finally, the type of loan that is really quite rare but  it's worthwhile to look at, nevertheless.  these are loans that you would think seem completely crazy at the outset.  these are negative amortization loans that is loans where people will  continue to borrow more rather than in these loans paying off some of your  equity in each period, you're actually increasing the amount of the loan.  and in these loans, the ltv starts at 90% or more.  so you're putting at most 10% down.  and then over the first few years of the loan, you're actually borrowing more.  plus, these will be low doc or no doc loans.  so we're putting very little money down, and  we are having no documentation of our income.  these are the types of loans that you would sometimes hear people call  liar loans.  so if anything,  we would expect the failure rate on these loans to be very high.  we don't see a significant amount of these loans at all until 2003,  when the global saving club begins to greatly increase the demand to own  the other side of this, to own mortgages.  in the early years of these loans, the failure rates were below ten percent.  once again, it is not until we see housing prices falling that we start to  notice that these loans are not performing well at all.  [music] 
[music]  turning next to the supply side.  if we're going to have an argument about moral hazard,  if we're gonna make the point that this was bad behavior or  moral hazard, we really need to have, at least on this side here,  the villains knowing what they're doing and getting away with it.  doesn't make a whole lot of sense to have the bad behavior by insiders and  then to have the insiders get slammed as well.  and that's exactly what we see.  even before lehman brothers, it appears to be the case that the insiders, the ones  who are supposed to be taking advantage of, and misleading these gullible  homeowners, were, in fact, themselves losing a tremendous amount of money.  here's just some summary statistics on losses during the crisis.  you can see that the institutions are losing multiples of billions of dollars.  citigroup losing 42.9 billion, ubs 38.2 billion, merrill lynch 37.1 billion.  here we see, in total, 20 institutions that lost,  each one of them more than six billion dollars during the financial crisis.  so starting with the idea, if these insiders really knew what they were  doing and were expecting that they weren't going to get harmed,  they certainly got it very, very wrong.  you can see this again by looking at whether or  not they actually had skin in the game.  so did insiders have skin in the game?  were they putting themselves at risk?  or instead, is it more like the story that, well they got their hands completely  off of all of these bad securities, and it was other people who lost money.  let's take a look.  once again, from the foote, gerardi, and willen paper, here's some evidence  of collectively what insiders held going into the crisis.  what was their exposure in terms of dollars?  so we've breaking up into different categories.  us banks and thrifts, so that's the standard banks.  the government sponsored enterprises,  federal home loan board which are government agencies that had exposure.  brokers and dealers, those are the traditional historical investment banks.  reits, which are real estate investment trusts, hedge funds,  other money managers, insurance companies, overseas investors,  financial guarantors like insurance companies, and then others.  and along the top, you see the categories of securities that they were exposed to.  loans, which are just traditional mortgages.  helocs and seconds, which are home equity lines of credit, and second mortgages.  so, these sit on top of, and have less seniority than traditional mortgages.  agency mortgage backed securities.  non-agency aaa securities.  this is the repackaged securitizations of, for example,  subprime loans, where the top of them were labeled as aaa.  cdos, which are collateralized debt obligations,  which are mostly taking already securitized bonds and  bringing them back all together again and slicing them up and out into more pieces.  and then other residential loans.  so what do we see in these categories?  so overall, there's close to three trillion of plain vanilla  loans on the books, mortgage loans on the books, two-thirds of them at banks.  most interesting, i find in this picture, is the amount of non-agency trip aaas.  so this is the stuff that really after the fact,  it's very hard to believe people thought really was safe.  this is the stuff made up of subprime loans at their core or  alt-a loans at their core.  virtually every group had exposure to this.  the banks have almost $400 billion of exposure to this.  overseas institutions, $400 billion of exposure.  the government sponsored enterprises, $300 billion of exposure.  money managers, 225 billion.  overall here, the category that we would think is  the category that everybody who was smart would have been washing their hands of  if they knew that these things were designed to fail, they're all in them.  similarly many of them are also in cdos, which are often one level  harder to understand and harder to believe people would think would not fail.  collectively, in the bottom right corner,  we see that there is just under 10.7 trillion of exposure to these  categories by major institutions worldwide in the crisis.  that's a very big number, if you knew going into the crisis that these  things really were rotten things to hold onto.  [music] 
[music]  our next case study in the investment bank of bear stearns.  we've already talked about bear stearns in a previous module where we discussed  the bear stearns funds that they had that were investing that were not funds that  themselves their own assets, but  rather funds that they managed that had invested in subprime securities.  which in june of 2007, they suspended redemptions and  then in july of 2007, brought back onto their balance sheet.  that's just one small part of a very large investment bank that  by mid-2007 had assets of about $400 billion.  they were significant players in all parts of the subprime space.  they were in loan origination, so they actually owned firms that went out and  made the sales and then they would take the mortgages and  warehouse them before they actually sent them out in securitizations.  they traded all kinds of subprime securities and  they were in the asset management business where they had funds that specialized in  buying those securities in the open market, often on a leverage basis.  as discussed, their first problems happened in the middle of 2007,  they suspended redemptions in two of their funds.  they took those funds back on their balance sheet,  effectively bailing them out.  once again, for reputational reasons, paying off the lenders of those funds, and  taking all of the collateral,  everything that the funds had, onto its own balance sheet.  so you think about what that means for a moment.  i'm a large institution, i have a business that  manages money for other people, so it's not actually bear stearns' money.  that business gets into trouble and bear stearns says, we want future customers  of bear stearns to understand that we will stand behind our products, if we have to.  so they effectively just buy the fund.  its a bail out of a private company for some of their products.  they take over the fund, they pay off the lenders and  they say we will take all the assets of those funds back on our balance sheet.  now that's gonna be a hit to bear stearns, and it was a hit.  but that, plus other hits that they had to things on their balance sheet  are not nearly enough to drive them into insolvency.  it's not the case that the funds, while we are talking billions of dollars,  is not nearly enough to wipe out bear stearns' equity level.  here's what happened in the last week, or in the weeks leading up to and  then the last week, of bear stearns' existence as an independent company.  that makes us think, what happened?  this is their liquidity, so  the amount, think of it just as their cash that they could access on any given day.  that number hovers between $15 and  $20 billion per day in february of 2008, leading into march of 2008.  we then see, starting on march 9th, a liquidity level of nearly $20  billion collapsed to zero over that week, $20 billion down to zero.  this is an investment bank that has no retail deposits.  there is nothing obvious here to run.  yet, it goes from really being a very substantial organization  to being gone over the course of a week.  this had a very profound effect on me, personally,  at the time, just intellectually.  my father worked at bear stearns, he was there at the time, and  i talked to him throughout this week.  at the beginning of the week, he was of the view that they had  an enormous amount of liquidity, and so there were rumors in the marketplace but  there was an enormous amount of liquidity and they should be fine.  but he understood by the middle of the week that that was not true anymore and  by the end of the week, that they wouldn't have a business anymore  unless they managed to find somebody with more liquidity,  in this case jp morgan to take it over.  this was very surprising to me because i really understood how this could happen to  a traditional bank but it was not obvious how you could get a run on a investment  bank, or on some firm that was in the wholesale finance system.  again, that's really quite the puzzle of the global financial crisis.  in the next lesson, what we will do is talk about what were the things that made  this liquidity go from 20 billion to zero.  what are the pieces that are akin to a run on the bank?  [music] 
[music]  so, what happened to bear stearns?  it was a remarkable combination of liquidity pressures that took virtually  everyone by surprise.  we don't have retail depositors taking their money out,  there's no retail deposits.  but there's a variety of things that make up effectively the same thing  that will drain the liquidity from a wholesale financial organization.  let's go through a few of them.  the first is prime brokerage withdrawals.  prime brokerage is a securities business that large investment banks,  large brokerage dealers, have been in for a very long time.  so brokerage, in general, means, say i go to my broker,  i deposit some cash, and i use that case to buy securities.  perhaps, i'm just buying stocks.  i'm buying stocks and bonds that trade on the new york stock exchange.  and when i do that, the broker, in general,  if i have a margin account is allowed to take the securities that i have bought,  that are now sitting in my account and to loan them out to other investors.  just like if you go to a bank and you give them money and  the money is in your deposit account, they may loan that money out for  someone's mortgage or for a business loan.  same goes for a broker dealer.  you go, you deposit some money, you buy stock.  they may loan that stock out to somebody who wants to borrow it.  prime brokerage is like that but on a much larger scale.  prime brokerage is when you are doing the brokerage activities for  a large institutional investor, typically a hedge fund.  so a hedge fund that has a very big business comes,  deposits some money with the broker dealer, goes and buys some stocks or  bonds, and now, the broker dealer can lend those things out.  while prime broker, clients, like hedge funds, are very savvy and  get concerned quite quickly, and rightly, as it turns out.  because when lehman brothers failed, prime brokerage clients did lose some money.  so a prime brokerage client,  like a hedge fund that has securities sitting at bear sterns and  gets nervous that bear stearns may fail, says, i would like to close my account.  now, the effect that has on bear stearns in the short run,  you would think shouldn't be a real big deal, indeed.  the money was there.  they just give the money back.  but this turns out to be a lot like pulling your money out  of a retail deposit.  bear stearns now has to give the securities over to the client,  and no longer can lend those securities out and get cash.  so that was a source of cash for bear stearns, and they're going to lose a big  chunk of it over the week prior to their rescue by jp morgan.  a second thing that happens is a term of art in the financial world,  called a novation.  a novation is where somebody comes and stands in between two parties in  a derivatives transaction and pretty much takes one of those parties out.  so for example, let's say that bear stearns has entered into  a derivative transaction on a simple interest rate swap of the type  that we talked about in a previous module with a counterparty.  now that counterparty, in ordinary times, isn't worried at all  about bear stearns being able to hold up their end of the bargain.  but if suddenly they see in this week that there are rumors and  concerns about bear stearns being able to transact, that party might say,  this is a very simple transaction, but  i don't wanna deal with the possibility of a counterparty that becomes bankrupt.  so that client calls a different investment bank and tells that investment  bank, would you please take over this particular position from bear stearns?  would you stand in the middle of us, and so  no longer will we have any exposure to bear stearns?  now, that type of activity is something that creates a tremendous amount of  chatter among traders.  when there are novations, a lot of people start to get worried.  and the place where that will manifest itself,  specifically with regards to liquidity, is in collateral calls.  let's take that same type of example where you have a transaction with bear stearns.  now bear stearns is a dealer.  they're often taking opposite sides of the same transaction, and  they have no net exposure in the end.  so for example, bear stearns enters into a currency trade with one client.  and on that currency trade, they are taking the dollar-side position and  they're short the pound, long dollars and short pounds.  and then with somebody else, they're long pounds, and short dollars.  and those two things completely offset against each other.  or in a more complex type of trade, they might be involved in different sides of  something that's very, very hard to measure.  some type of sub-prime security, for example, where they both bought and  sold protection on that security.  now, what happens in these contracts is that even though the contracts might  not expire for a year or two years, it might be very long term.  it's still the case that every day, if the prices are moving,  the side that the prices are moving against has to put up collateral.  much the same way, for example, a bank might come to somebody and  say, it seems like your business is really having trouble and you have this loan, i  would like you to give us more collateral so that we know that we're safe.  that's what happens in trades every single day on wall street.  one side asks for collateral from the other side when the trade has moved.  now, the trouble is when there is nervousness among traders about  the existence of a specific type of company,  then their counterparties will always come to them and ask for more collateral.  whereas, if you have the other side of the trade with the counterparty that is still  perceived as safe, you can't do the same thing.  so, if you stand in the middle of a whole host of trades on both sides,  because that is your business, you're standing in the middle of it.  you're a dealer.  but on one side of those trades, you have to post a lot more collateral, and  on the other side of the trade where you should be able to ask for more collateral,  you lack the power to be able to force your counterparty to give you that  collateral.  and if you fail to make a collateral call, if someone comes to you and says,  i want you to post more collateral and you fight with them and say, no, that's crazy.  that makes the market feel you're in even more trouble than you are in.  and so, you have to do it.  and that's an enormous drain if you have very large positions on both sides, if you  have to post collateral on one side and another unable to captured on the other.  finally, one thing that happened that is underappreciated to almost all of  the firms, and it's something that we saw in asset back commercial paper in the runs  that happened in the summer of 2007 was that maturity shortened.  so one way that you can try to feel a little safer when you're making a loan to  an institution that you might think is not safe is to say,  all right, i'm not sure if you're gonna survive the month.  i feel a little bit better about you surviving one day.  so instead of giving them a loan, bear stearns getting loans,  particularly in the sale and  repurchase market, which is one that we'll discuss in detail in the next module.  instead of being able to get 30-day term loans, a lot more of their  activity moved to be overnight, and now it's a very fragile situation.  if you're only able to borrow for very short periods of time, now,  virtually, all or a much larger chunk of your portfolio can run very quickly.  and that is kinda of a final step of what happened to bear stearns,  which is as they came to the place where most of their loans were rolling over  on a very short horizon, once there was sufficient cascade of nervousness in  the market and their counterparties were unwilling to give them that money,  that's the final piece to the puzzle.  the final run, draining $20 billion of liquidity in one week.  [music] 
[music]  the aftermath of the bear stearns rescue has large implications for  what went on later in the financial crisis.  on friday, march 13th the federal reserve supported a jp morgan  buyout of bear stearns.  a buyout that was initially set at $2 per share, and  was later raised to $10 in order to get it to pass bear stearns shareholders.  the rapid failure of bear stearns was a wake up call to policy makers, but  not a big enough wake up call.  the policy makers after that time,  introduced several new tools to support liquidity in inter-bank markets.  we'll discuss these tools in a later module when we talk about the broad range  of actions taken by the federal reserve and other government entities.  for a variety of reasons the markets did not learn their lesson.  the failure of lehman brothers six months later followed quite a similar script.  in fact if anything people felt a little better because they figured it had been  six months that had gone by and now we should know how to deal with it.  some argue that the actions that the federal reserve took  during the bear stearns crisis created a false sense of complacency, and  a belief that there would always be support for other too big to fail.  that being the term, institutions.  a belief that of course proved false and  damaging during the lehman part of the crisis, when there was no rescue,  private or otherwise, that was arranged and backed up by the government.  an alternative explanation is that the wholesale banking operations that  bear stearns was involved in.  the list of things that could go wrong that we discussed in the previous lesson  of collateral calls, novations of derivatives, prime brokerage runs,  a shortening of maturity on repo.  this collection of things just really was never seen in one place before.  and in fact our regulatory system was years and  years behind in understanding how this could lead to a collapse.  and overall, there was just no set of tools available to handle the rapid  failure of a large, complex organization with all of these types of transactions.  there'll be a lot more on this later when we go through the lehman failure.  [music] 
what caused the financial crisis of 2007, eight, and nine?  if you think back to the eve of the crisis, the summer of 2007,  the united states was extremely vulnerable to financial crisis.  it wasn't completely apparent the time, but  i'm gonna show you the things that made us vulnerable to a severe crisis.  this shows 100 years of losses in the banking system, and  you can see the peak of losses in the great depression was terrible.  and following the great depression we had 70 years of relative calm.  it wasn't a period without crisis, there were lots of periods of financial trauma,  financial distress.  the s & l crisis is a good example.  but those losses were very small,  very mild, very moderate relative to the losses you saw in the great depression.  this is important,  because it led people to believe as memory of the severe crisis faded  that we were living in a calmer, more benign, less risky financial environment.  over part of this period,  you saw what economists described as the great moderation.  this was a period where the depth and frequency of recessions diminished,  where the volatility of growth outcomes was more moderate.  there seemed to be less risk, less risk of loss in income, less risk of acute periods  of high unemployment, less risk of deep, broad, long-lasting recessions.  in part because of that, you saw this long rise in house prices.  people were more confident that the value of homes would rise, therefore they were  more confident they could borrow a large amount relative to their income and  lenders were more confident they could lend a large portion of someone's income  because that was backed by what they expected to be a rising value of  that financial asset.  and related to that, you saw this huge boom in borrowing relative to income.  we used to call this chart the mount fuji chart.  a friend of mine, lee sax, who i worked with twice at the treasury used to bring  this to me when i was at new york fed to illustrate and  emphasize the risks in this long rise in borrowing relative to income.  how is that borrowing financed?  if you look at the dark blue shaded area at the bottom,  that's the share of that rise in borrowing finance by what we think of as banks.  and, if you look at that, it's relatively flat,  it drifts up gently in the later stage of the boom.  but most of the increase in that borrowing, by individuals and  by companies, was financed by other parts of the national system.  by investment banks, by the government mortgage guarantors, fannie and  freddie mac, by non-bank financial institutions like ge capital.  and that's important because those institutions existed outside  the safety net, the safeguards established after the great depression.  and they were financed in ways that made them much more vulnerable to runs and  panics.  alongside this rise in shadow banking,  there was a substantial increase in short term deposit like liabilities  that people thought they could withdraw on demand without any risk of loss.  and that was critical to making the system vulnerable to the type of run and  panic that ensued in the fall of 08.  so in the united states on the eve of the crisis,  we were coming off a long period where belief in a more stable future produced  a huge boom in lending and in financial assets.  huge increase in debt relative to income, financed in very dangerous, runnable  forms, with most of the increment financed outside the core of the banking system,  and that created the conditions for panic and collapse.  now again, there were a lots of causes in these cases.  we had a long trade where monetary policy was very accommodative,  where real interest rates in the us and around the world were very, very low.  there was a huge increase in savings in the most populous parts of the world,  and over time a larger portion of those savings removing  outside their home country to invest in places like united states.  that helped hold down long rates as the fed tightened.  there was a huge amount of fraud and predation in the us financial system.  there were pockets of moral hazard most compellingly in the mortgage guarantors  fannie and freddie.  there were a mess of other incentive problems throughout the financial system,  and we had a very balkanized segmented regulatory structure.  [music] 
[music]  so this course is organized into 13 modules.  the introductory module is what you're listening to right now.  following this introductory module, in module two,  secretary geithner will lecture on the common causes of financial crises.  bit of a history lesson on what leads to financial crises and  their regularity across different economies over time.  then in module three, i will introduce housing and mortgages and  many terms that we will need to know to work on this throughout the entire course.  then in module four, we turn to the other side of the equation.  because in order to understand why housing grew so fast in the united states and  why there was a bubble in housing in the united states, we need to know why  there was such a willingness for lenders to give money to the borrowers.  and we'll do that in talking about safe assets,  which is a term that we will describe and the global savings glut, which was a term  coined by chairman ben bernanke before he was chairman ben bernanke when  he was talking about the large amount of savings in the developing world and  in the oil producing countries in the early part of this century.  once we have these two pieces, the pieces of understanding of the dynamics of  the housing market and the demand for  housing coming from buyers, and the supply of the willingness of lenders,  because of the global savings glut, to supply a lot of funds for  housing, we can turn to understanding the housing crisis.  and there are several different explanations of the housing crisis, and  in module five, what we will do is we'll go through these explanations, and  also talk about how the different definitions of housing crisis,  subprime crisis, financial crisis, and great recession, all fit together.  in module six,  we turn to understanding the dynamics of actually how the crisis happened.  and this is very important because before we can really get a feeling for  or any kind of understanding for the different tools that were used to fight  the crisis, you have to see what a modern financial crisis looks like.  modern financial crisis is different than the old style runs on the banks  that we would see throughout history.  in this new financial crisis, it happened in the wholesale banking system,  also called the shadow banking system or the parallel banking system.  and we will trace through exactly how that happened beginning in the summer of 2007  when anxiety started to hit the markets, working through the beginning of 2008 and  the rescue of bear stearns by jpmorgan aided by the federal government.  and we will do that through module six and seven.  it's a very important build up period and  it's important to see this kind of slow motion disaster and  to understand why the reactions that we took to it were necessary.  in module eight, we'll turn to the panic, and the panic begins with the failure,  the bankruptcy of lehman brothers on september 15th, 2008.  this led to a chain reaction of events over the subsequent several months  in the united states and in europe that required policy makers to intervene in  markets in ways that they had never done before.  in module nine, secretary geithner will talk about those responses.  and as secretary geithner was in the middle of making many of these  decisions and was seeing first hand just how damaging the crisis was,  his perspective on this is very, very valuable.  in module ten, secretary geithner will continue on this discussion, expanding  on some of the policy actions that were taken following the panic period,  particularly with regards to housing markets.  and also talk about what methods we really think we might have,  to respond to crises in the future.  in modules 11 and 12, i will turn to talking about the euro crisis.  first, in module 11, what went on in europe  during the global financial crisis period of 2007 to 2009.  many of the things that were happening in various european countries  mirrored what was going on in the united states.  ireland had a housing crisis.  iceland had a full on banking crisis.  and many of the peripheral countries in europe had a very, very, deep recession.  this led to what we now call, the eurozone crisis.  the eurozone crisis follows on the global financial crisis.  it's the lingering after effects and also the fact that in europe  because of the rigidities of having a single currency, it was more difficult to  adjust following the financial crisis than it was in the united states.  the eurozone crisis, as i stand here today, is still flaring.  and in addition to module 12,  giving us the basics of what went on in the eurozone crisis since 2009,  i will also prepare an extra module that will bring us up to date whenever  that date is to see where the eurozone crisis is at that point.  finally in module 13, i will do a course summary and bring together some  of the themes that we have learned over the course of all of these modules.  [music] 
[music]  there are four important themes that will recur often in this course.  the first theme is that of asset bubbles.  reinhart and rogoff in a book in 2008 called this time is different,  point out the important role of asset bubbles in financial crisis.  prior to all financial crisis,  you will see a large increase in the price of at least one asset class.  when this price later falls,  we retroactively label that original increase to be a bubble.  we don't know whether or not it's a bubble in advance, but  we certainly can see that the price has been increasing very rapidly.  in modern financial crises, that is those that we have had in developed countries  since world war ii, housing has always been implicated  as an asset that has been increasing prior to the bubble.  sometimes, it's not the only asset, but  it has always been an asset that's been increasing in value.  in the global financial crisis, this bubble was indeed in housing.  and we will see that this is a crucial part, and following through and  understanding what exactly the dynamics of that housing market were, will  be a crucial part of understanding the buildup to the global financial crisis.  a second theme is that in each successive generation we  seem to have an uncanny ability based on need to invent new kinds of money.  so when giving the conceptual framework for  financial crisis, i talked about how you would need to convert some of the value  that we have in long live assets into something safe that we can transact with.  the way that has worked in history has changed.  through most of the history of civilization,  our monetary needs were met primarily by metal based currencies, gold and silver.  the rise of the modern state has allowed for sovereign backed fiat money,  called fiat because it's not actually backed by gold or silver or  any other metal or commodity.  instead, it's just a promise of the government.  it is effectively backed by the human capital of the citizens of a country and  the belief that the government in the future will be able to tax that  human capital to pay off any debts that it has.  at some point gold and  silver by themselves really weren't efficient ways to transact.  and had we not come up with fiat money,  we would've been very limited in our ability to have economic growth.  if you think about how difficult it would be to carry gold around if you wanted to  buy a very, very large building in london, or to carry enough silver around and  silver, of course, now being worth, in american dollars, $15 an ounce.  so you would need tiny, tiny, little pieces of silver if you wanted to buy  a lot of things that were worth less than $15.  this is not a very efficient way to transact.  so instead, what we have is a form of paper currency, or fiat money.  and that was developed and through fits and starts over the last few centuries and  became really, much more of a success into the 20th century, but  even stable governments have limits.  and the demand for  money can exceed the supply of metal, plus sustainable fiat money.  additional monies are then manufactured by the financial system,  using private debt backed by collateral.  when you have a demand deposit in a bank that demand deposit  is first principals backed by the assets of the bank.  when you go and take money out of your checking account and someone else accepts  that check they're doing that because they believe that the bank is solvent.  now up to some limit you also get in the united states and  in many other countries, deposit insurance when you have your money in the bank, but  in the end that's just the government backing them again.  if we don't have enough belief that the government is truly able to back all of  the money that's in the economy, we're going to need some form of private assets.  in this case, houses, or small business loans to back it.  the history of financial crisis,  is a tour through sad stories of new types of money gone bad.  the global financial crisis is no exception to that.  so what we will see is that the traditional ways to produce money  that the financial system had really insufficient to meet the demands for  safe assets and for things that we could transact with in the economy  going into the early part of the 21st century.  at that point, the financial system did what it always does, and  began to manufacture new forms of safe assets,  using the collateral that was available and embodied in other long lived assets.  in this case, housing.  the third theme is understanding the anatomy of a modern financial panic.  for hundreds of years, panics were easy to spot.  depositors would literally run to their banks to exchange their bank notes,  their currency at the time, for gold.  or to remove the deposits that they had in their checking or savings accounts and  take them out so that they weren't relying just on the bank's promise but  they actually had legal tender.  the goal with financial crisis was different.  with the panics occurring out of public sight, in the non-bank part of  the financial sector, often called shadow banking, or the parallel banking system.  to fully understand the global financial crisis, and the efforts required to fight  the panic, it is important to understand the mechanics of this modern system, and  we will cover that at length in this course.  finally, the fourth theme of the course is fighting the panic and  the things that need to be done in the midst of a meltdown in order to prevent it  from getting even worse.  going into the global financial crisis,  governments from all over the world were under prepared.  with the available tools that already existed that were built for fighting, just  an old-fashioned bank run, where people would run to the bank to take out gold, or  run to the bank to take out their deposits.  but not a modern crisis that is taking place in the shadow banking system, or  the parallel banking system.  to fight this particular crisis, the tools that were needed,  forms of emergency lending by the central bank.  guarantees and capital injections by the fiscal authority were extended to creative  new uses that were not anticipated when those rules were originally written down.  the evidence shows that this panic fighting was a success, but  the success came at the cost of some political backlash and  in some cases reduced our firefighting capabilities for the next crisis.  [music] 
[music]  so we've been using several terms, and you'll hear several terms getting used,  sometimes interchangeably.  the housing crisis.  the financial crisis.  the foreclosure crisis.  the great recession.  all of these different terms mean slightly different things.  and if we were going to be more precise, which sometime we will need to be.  we should say the following,  which is that the housing crisis is a primary driver of the financial crisis.  they're not identical things.  one can have a housing crisis without a financial crisis.  and one can have a financial crisis without a housing crisis.  in the united states, these things corresponded.  they did not correspond in every country in the world, many of which had financial  crises, but as we have seen already did not have housing crises.  similarly, it would be possible to have a housing and  foreclosure crisis without it infecting the entire financial system.  so we say housing crisis, really mean exactly what was going on in housing.  which is, housing prices fell dramatically, and  there was a lot of foreclosure.  so, foreclosure crisis, that would be a synonym for housing crisis.  the financial crisis, that's the whole thing that we've been talking about that  happened to the financial system.  with the failure of financial institutions,  the seizing up of financial markets.  the financial crisis and the housing crisis together  contributed significantly to what is now called the great recession.  so, that's real economic activity.  a falling in the real economic activity, people losing their jobs.  falling house prices had a very large effect on that independently.  the collapse of different parts of the financial system  had an effect on that independently.  you can have a recession without a housing crisis or a financial crisis.  but in this particular case,  the recession became what we call the great recession, in large part,  because it coincided with the housing crisis and the financial crisis.  now, to really understand how it is that these things are related,  why it is that the housing crisis is a primary driver of the financial crisis,  we need to look at another side of what was going on.  today we've talked a lot about the loans themselves, and the borrowers, and  the foreclosure that happened on those borrowers.  but we have to understand why there was such a growth.  particularly in subprime loans.  what was driving that?  where was the demand side for the loans?  for owning the loans, for putting those loans on your balance sheet, or  for bundling them up?  so we will do that.  and over the next few modules,  we'll develop the connections between the housing sector and the financial sector.  and show why really it was necessary that these pieces be moving together that  actually led to the great recession.  [music] 
[music]  >> the global financial crisis caused a deep recession.  and after a brief recovery, this morphed into what we now call the eurozone crisis,  which cause a second recession in the countries that use the euro.  in this graph you can see this double dip recession very clearly.  along the y axis is real gdp quarter on quarter growth rates, annualized.  and along the x axis is time.  so we can see that in the, in 2008 was the last time  that there was positive growth before the global financial crisis.  and towards the second half of 2008, this morphs into negative growth.  and after two consecutive quarters of negative growth,  that's a standard workday definition of a recession.  and so that begins in 2008, and it deepens significantly as we move into 2009.  until the eurozone countries actually have nearly -3% gdp quarter on quarter growth.  they recovered from the recession as we did in the united states in early 2010.  and have weak growth always below 1% up for the next year and a half to two years.  and then we see the double dip recession, so  a second recession coming off of really the same original event  of the global financial crisis for which it never really recovered.  and this negative growth recessed until the end of 2013 where growth  remains very, very sluggish as we go through towards the end of 2014.  this deep recession, and then brief recovery followed by double dip recession,  really can be seen, not just in the gdp figures, but  in numbers that have much more of a social effect, which is the unemployment figures.  this graph shows unemployment, overall unemployment,  and youth unemployment in the eurozone along with wages.  on the left-hand side, we plot the overall unemployment rate and  the unemployment rate for youth, which i believe is defined here as under 25.  the overall unemployment rate  starts higher in europe than it does in the united states.  europe always has had slightly higher reported unemployment rates for  reasons that are not completely understood,  but in part have to do with a slightly larger underground economy.  that unemployment rate peaks here at close to 12% in 2013.  the youth unemployment rate is much more significant effect.  that starts off at about 17.5% and peaks near 25% in 2013.  this level of unemployment is very,  very difficult to maintain socially and politically.  and is one of the reasons that you see a rise of labor friendly parties  in many eurozone countries, particularly eurozone countries in the periphery,  portugal, spain, greece, italy, that have had the most severe problems.  in addition to unemployment falling, can also see that the year on year growth  rate for wages is at a lower level than it was earlier.  now you might believe why doesn't this fall and become negative?  a negative growth rate in compensation per employee might help to  ease the unemployment process.  part of the reason that that's a challenge has to do with the types of labor laws  that exist in these countries and the restrictions of being under a single  currency which doesn't allow individual countries to inflate away and  get a lower real growth rate for their compensation per employee.  we'll talk more about that in the next module.  it's important to note that the economic effects of the global financial crisis.  and it's aftermath were much worse int he eurozone than in the united states.  they start off looking fairly similar.  but while the united states recovers,  the eurozone runs in to the double dip recession.  you can see that graphically in this picture.  real gdp is plotted on the left picture for the united states and for  the euro area.  it starts off and it's indexed to 100 at the beginning of 2008.  both the euro area and the united states fall during the global financial crisis.  and then both recover.  but in late 2010, early 2011, when the united states starts on a path  of continuing upward growth, the euro area falls back down again and  only sluggishly recovers towards the end of 2013.  real gdp per capita,  which somewhat dampens the effect since the united states has somewhat  faster population growth than the euro area, shows much the same pattern.  dropping off during the global financial crisis, recovery through 2010,  and then continued recovery in the united states and falling off in the euro area.  the difference between these two economic outcomes is important and  really is the reason why, as i stand here today,  we would call it a continuing crisis in the eurozone.  >> [music] 
[music]  in this module, we discuss the ongoing crisis in the eurozone, the now 19  countries within the european union that use the euro as their single currency.  the theme of the ongoing eurozone crisis is the following.  first, the global financial crisis is the shock.  so, there's an initial shock to the system.  that is the global financial crisis,  which is really going on middle of 2007 to the middle of 2009.  there's been recovery in the united states since the global financial crisis, but  not really a complete recovery or  anywhere near a complete recovery in some parts of the eurozone.  this shock caused and was exacerbated by different problems in different countries.  in ireland and spain, it was banking problems  similar to the types of banking problems that we had in the united states.  there are credit booms and  housing booms, a large rise in housing prices in these countries.  in italy and portugal and greece, however, it was fiscal issues, and  then the sovereign debt related to those fiscal issues.  so, we're really looking at different parts of the eurozone that had  different structural weaknesses, and then they're gonna get hit by a massive shock.  in economic terms, it's like an earthquake or a hurricane, and  it's then the resiliency of the economic system, which in europe was somewhat  hampered by some structural deficiencies in the way the euro is set up,  that's going to make it much more difficult for europe to recover.  for all the countries in the eurozone, in addition to just what's going on in  the euro itself, there are institutional and political aspects of the union  that make it difficult to respond to the large economic shock.  the slope price adjustment that's due to having a single currency, but then,  also, fiscal federalism that is too weak to support significant transfers  across different countries and an insistence on austerity, or  on governments cutting back, and a reluctance to forgive debt.  and we'll discuss each of these things in various lessons of this module.  [music] 
[music]  it's easiest to understand the eurozone crisis by breaking it up into three  different phases.  in the first phase, which goes from december 2009 until july of 2011.  the emphasis is on weakness and bailout for  smaller countries that are on the periphery of the eurozone.  specifically, greece, ireland, and portugal.  in the second phase of the eurozone crisis, which goes from july 2011 to  july 2012 the crisis spreads to the larger countries of italy and spain.  and we see a double dip recession, meaning we had a recession, the global financial  crisis, we recovered and now we're gonna dip again, throughout the eurozone.  phase three of the eurozone crisis begins in july 2012 and  goes to, well it's still going on.  and the problem here is mostly that  political systems in the countries of the eurozone have adjusted and adapted to  the policies that were put in place during the earlier phases of the crisis.  and now those political battles are playing out and we may see, we may yet  see the eurozone break up.  anti-austerity political parties gained power throughout europe.  greece in particular is like the canary in the coal mine.  they had the strongest anti-austerity party come to power, and  periodically with each additional need of the bailout greece is getting closer and  closer to completely leaving the eurozone.  something that's known in the parlance as the grexit or  the greek exit from the eurozone.  turning now specifically to the details of phase one of the crisis,  we see that each of the countries, greece, ireland, and portugal, one by  one fell like dominoes to the pressures of the shock of the global financial crisis.  the first phase of the crisis really can be marked in december 2009 when  the new government in greece acknowledged that their actual debt  was significantly higher than what was thought of under the previous government.  this isn't that unusual for countries, a new leader comes in and  they say that the past regime made mistake and we're acknowledging those mistakes.  but in this case, it's really a level of accounting irregularity that you don't see  at high levels of government really anymore in the 21st century for  developed countries.  but we saw it here that their debt was higher and their deficits were higher.  the debt measured at 300 billion euros would be 113%  of gdp which far exceeds a eurozone limit set by the master  treaty in 1992 of just a 60% debt to gdp limit.  now each year, countries would frequently miss their targets.  the target being any individual year having a deficit of less than 3% of gdp.  but there wasn't really a mechanism in place to punish countries and  get them to stop.  just some moral suasion that would come from the center.  but overall once it was recognized just how severe the problems were in greece,  this was no longer just about missing one year or two years of a target.  but rather the sustainability of their debt and  their ability to pay it off in the future.  if we think about what does 113% of gdp means or anything more than  100% means that you owe more than the total output of your country.  and historically, not many countries are able to pay that back.  we, of course do have counter examples.  japan, a developed country with a very, very low interest rate,  is able to sustain debt levels around 200 percent without markets getting nervous,  but with a country like greece where there's concern  about the management of the economy.  and the interest rates on the debt starts to rise,  a 113% debt burden can be very, very significant.  and it leads to market participants being concerned  about their ability to pay this debt back.  the greek debt and deficits continue to be revised upwards  as various accounting problems are better understood.  in early 2010, this leads to heavy concerns about greece and  also other indebted eurozone countries, most notably, ireland and portugal.  and remember ireland and portugal don't have the same root cause of problems.  they have the global financial crisis.  but in ireland the main reason they face a debt crisis is that  they had a housing boom, their banks got in trouble, and  then their government came in, and guaranteed their banks.  the government was really unable to support the banks.  so now we're worried about the government being able to pay its debt back.  in portugal it was much more about fiscal problems and slow growth.  not so much about accounting problems or  irregularities in the measurement of the debt.  nevertheless, all three of these countries are unable to, in the end,  deal with the shock of the global financial crisis.  and the concerns about them are eventually validated in a series of bailouts.  led by a group of three, the international monetary fund,  the european central bank, and the european commission, or  the collection of eurozone ministers, the finance ministers in this case.  these three groups are known the troika, and  we will frequently hear about negotiations between debtor countries and the troika.  the bailouts are first for greece for 110 billion euros in may of 2010.  next for ireland, which requested a bailout and  received one of 85 billion euros in november 2010.  and then finally portugal for 78 billion euros in may 2011.  this would be followed later on by further bailouts for greece,  which will become important parts in phase two and in phase three of the crisis.  importantly, the bailouts that are received are conditional.  so the troika requires that they don't hand the money over all at once,  but rather they make payments at pre-specified times.  conditional on the countries, following up on austerity programs,  the raising of taxes that are collection of taxes, and  the cutting of various types of government spending, and  then other types of market reforms, typically about the labor market.  so what we have here is not an unconditional here's money for  your debt, but rather, when every few months, as we hand out another dollop.  another 12 billion euros here, or  25 billion euros there, we check to see whether or  not you've been following the program that you've been asked or required to follow.  it is exactly at those times, the handing  out a new piece of a bailout that we see periodic flare-ups of the crisis.  because at each of these times, the question comes, have they,  usually what we've seen most often is greece,  has greece lived up to the terms of the agreement that they had.  and if there's concern that they have not led up to those terms, then there needs to  be a new negotiation around the time of that disbursement of the bailout funds.  it's at each of those times,  that suddenly you'll see a lot of articles appearing in the newspaper.  and a question about whether or not greece will survive, for example, in the euro.  [music] 
[music]  in phase 2 of the eurozone crisis, beginning in the summer of 2011,  we start to see the crisis move not just from greece, ireland and portugal.  but now, the contagion starts to infect the larger countries of spain and italy.  and marked the beginning of this with what later became the second greek bailout.  the preliminary agreement of a second bailout for greece was in july of 2011,  and that was to be for 109 billion euros.  this was later increased to 130 billion when the agreement was finalized in 2012.  this was intended to put once and for all the eurozone sovereign debt  part of the crisis behind us and reassure markets that  the leaders were prepared to do what was necessary to put the crisis behind.  it didn't work out that way.  so really in all attempts as you have heard from secretary geithner,  what policymakers are trying to do is come with enough force, such that  confidence can be restored overall in the economy by market participants.  in this particular case, what we see from history is this just wasn't enough.  and in fact, we see that directly in rates.  spreads on spanish and italian sovereign debt, which up until this point  had be somewhat contained, increased dramatically in the summer of 2011.  leading to a statement from the ecb on august 7th that it would buy bonds from  those countries, italy and spain, in order to maintain stability of their debt.  this was a very big move for the european central bank.  and it was the start of a series of  fairly significant moves that were unprecedented in its history.  the european central bank was set up with a single mandate.  and that single mandate was to keep inflation hold to a steady currency.  we don't wanna have a high inflation rate.  it was not asked, worry about stability.  it was not required in it's mandate to worry about unemployment.  the federal reserve on the other hand, in the united states has a dual mandate  to worry both about full employment and about inflation.  that provides a little more wiggle room in cases like this.  so the actions that are taken by the ecb here, hard to immediately  see how those actions are related to inflation keeping a stable currency.  and there would be court challenges that would take place over the subsequent  several years about whether the ecb was actually exceeding their mandate.  and this would be step one in that process.  italy and spain, after the announcement from the ecb, respond by doing their part.  and even though they haven't received a bail out that has any specific conditions,  italy and spain never less react with austerity policies.  so either promises of balanced budgets in the future, cutting of spending,  or raising of taxes in the present.  by early 2012, the financial situation is more stable.  bond yields have come down, but there's a deep, in this case a double dip  second recession that has taken hold throughout the eurozone.  and the levels of unemployment are dangerously high from a social  perspective.  in spain and greece, they're at 20%, and  youth unemployment levels in these countries are near 50%.  in march of 2012 greece entered a technical default on some of their bonds.  when they forced haircuts on some of their bond holders.  so some of their bond holders had voluntarily agreed to  take less than a hundred cents on the dollar in us parlance.  and then they forced that upon other bond holders,  which meant that technically they were in default.  in july of 2012 the ecb president, mario draghi,  stated that the central bank would do whatever it takes to preserve the euro.  this speech and subsequent actions to calm financial markets worked.  and there was generally a calming down,  a lowering of the spreads, on sovereign bonds.  but, this calming of financial markets was combined with  the actual real effects of the austerity policies that got us to this point.  and the weakness in the countries in the slow growth persisted.  [music] 
[music]  we now come to the third and, as of now, still final stage of the eurozone crisis.  it begins after this droggy speech of july 2012 mentioned in the previous lesson.  and is still going on as of the middle of 2015.  this phase has been driven by the inevitable political backlash to austerity  driven economic weakness.  in countries throughout the eurozone, anti-austerity and anti-euro parties  have gained power and pressed their governments to relax austerity conditions.  this process is most advanced in greece, where the syriza party,  led by alex tsipras, has teetered on the edge of leaving the eurozone.  since this is a fast moving situation,  we will add a bonus module to this course to discuss the latest developments.  when you see that bonus module, you'll be as fully up to date as possible.  the case standing here from my place before you see that bonus module,  is somewhat of a scary one.  it's not at all obvious either that greece can maintain their position in the euro,  nor if they do maintain their position in the euro, that the greek economy will be  able to within the matrix of that single currency survive.  [music] 
[music]  all right, let's look at some of the data.  what we'll see is that countries,  that bernanke called the the global savings glut countries,  did predominantly demand safe government and agency debt from the united states.  here's our picture that shows that.  we have three groups.  on the left is china, in the middle is other asian countries, and  all the way over on the right are opec countries.  the blue bar reflects the cumulative current account balance over  the four-year period, 2003 to 2007.  so, during these four years, you read this picture as saying,  china had $900 billion of cumulative current account balance.  this is like savings.  from the perspective of a household, this would be, i am selling more things than i  am spending, and so i need to save this somewhere.  what did china do with this $900 billion?  first, the red bar, which makes up a large majority of the overall $900 billion,  was spent on acquisitions of u.s. treasury securities and agency debt.  the green bar, net acquisitions of other u.s. assets and  the yellow is net flows to europe.  so really, this is united states, china is putting its money into the united states.  how about other parts of asia?  for other parts of asia, we see about $600 billion of current  account assets, and there it's split a little more evenly,  about half and half between the united states and europe.  but the majority of the united states assets that were acquired are safe u.s.  treasury securities and agency debt.  opec countries, it is less severe,  although they did have about $700 billion of current account deficits.  in that case, the majority is not spent in the united states but  it is still the case that $100 billion of safe government debt is demanded.  all together, we're just under a trillion during these four years,  just under a trillion from these three places of demand for u.s.  government debt and agency securities.  what's interesting is, as we will see,  this was precisely the time when there's not all that much of it being created.  so the data show that global savings glut countries  predominantly demanded safe government and agency debt, in particular china.  in addition to the global savings glut countries, though, we're gonna see  an interesting type of financial intermediation coming from europe.  non-global savings glut european countries,  while they didn't run total current account deficits or surpluses,  they also demanded government debt and other aaa rated substitutes.  aaa being the safest type of debt that's privately produced.  they finance these purchases with deposits and commercial paper often issued  in their own countries, so think of this as being almost like a banking activity.  i'm going to take in deposits, and then, instead of investing those deposits  in other people's houses, i'm going to buy safe securities from the united states.  here's the picture which shows us this and  now we're gonna break it up into two different time periods.  on the left, is the time period from 1998 to 2002 and  here, we're gonna add up totals.  this is just who is buying, in the united states,  aaa-rated securities of four different types.  treasury securities which are in green, agency debt,  that's fannie mae and freddie mac, that's in blue.  other corporate debt, which is in red, and  residential mortgage backed securities, commercial mortgaged backed securities and  other asset backed securities, more on those later today.  for now, just think of them as other forms of very highly rated debt and  they are in the purple.  so between 1998 and 2002, the total change in the holdings of such things  from global savings glut countries is relatively small and  overall, they're buying the blue and the green stuff.  that's the bar that's furthest over to the left.  similarly, the change in european holdings right next to it is not,  on net, very large.  the total change in foreign holdings, which is the third bar,  works out to certainly, under $1 trillion,  roughly $600 billion.  at the same time, the change in the total amount of these things, outstanding,  in the united states, note the green, the green is negative.  during the time from 1998 to 2002, when the world was starting to demand a lot of  these securities, the united states government was running surpluses.  this may seem like a very funny historical artifact.  but at this time, many of the discussions were,  what are we gonna do once we've retired all of our long term debt?  funny to think about that now but indeed, we were retiring debt and so  the change in the total amount outstanding was low.  where it was being built up is the blue.  we were adding over this time period  roughly 2.5 trillion to the total amounts outstanding of agency debt.  in fact, around this time, the discussions were about how agency debt was going to  replace u.s. government debt as the benchmark for risk free assets.  it's a very different picture when we look at the 2003 to 2007 global  savings glut period.  this is the right side of your picture and  the first bar there is a summary of what we saw in the previous picture.  this is the total change in total savings glut holdings of u.s.  aaa securities and as you can see, it's just under $1 trillion.  most of it is green but there is a big chunk that is also blue.  they're not the only ones,  european countries also greatly increased their demand.  looking back at the 98 to 2002 period, we don't see very much either from  global savings glut countries or european countries.  but here we have european countries coming in themselves at roughly $600 billion.  looking next to the right, we are going to sum up global savings glut, european,  and all other countries.  and here we see about 2.5 trillion total increase in the amount  that's been purchased during this time period from abroad, 2.5 trillion.  now that's 2.5 trillion at the same time we were only producing  about 1 trillion of new government debt.  that's the green bar, that's all the way over to the right and  another 1.5 trillion approximately of agency debt.  so all of the new debt produced in the united states by the government and  by the government agencies was effectively soaked up during this time period  by foreign buyers, leaving no additional capacity for  investors in the united states.  what were they to do?  we can see what they actually did do.  they bought other aaa stuff, not this little sliver of red,  which is corporate highly rated bonds.  those are limited, there's just not that many of them out there.  instead, what they bought was this purple and  the purple here is residential mortgage backed securities.  that had to fill the overall gap between the amount that was demanded from abroad  and domestically, and the total amount that was being produced naturally without  thinking about the market's needs by the u.s. government and its agencies.  [music] 
[music]  all right, so  we have foreign demand that's coming from global savings glut countries.  we have demand coming from european countries as they go through  this intermediation of commercial paper and demand deposits in their own country,  exchanging them for aaa securities in the united states.  we also have institutional cash pools, large  institutional investors, that are growing significantly over this time period.  some very important work on this has been done by zoltan pozsar,  who was at the time, an economist at the international monetary fund.  and what he's looking at here, we see two lines.  one is the lower line, the black line,  is the increase in cash pools by large institutions.  the right way to think about large institutions here are large corporations,  mutual funds, sovereign wealth funds, etc.  and it depends on how you count.  there's kind of clear ways where you can count them based on available data,  that is the solid line.  and then there are, where you have to make estimates, and that is the dotted line.  and, this has a steady increase up until about 2002,  but then you would say a real explosion.  so we're at a number just over 1 trillion in the solid line,  as we sit at the beginning of the global savings glut.  and this rises significantly to be more than 2 trillion,  again this is the solid line by 2007.  the rise in the dotted line is even more severe.  so if we accept the estimates, the careful estimates from this work,  we're at about 2 trillion at the beginning of the global savings glut in 2003,  and we rise to nearly 4 trillion at its peak in 2007.  so, this is money that's not going to be accounted for  in the statistics that we saw in the previous two pictures,  which are really representing official government sources that are purchasing  us government securities and other aaa securities.  these are demands coming from the large institutional investors  that we talked about at the very beginning of this module.  investors who have so much money,  that the government won't be able to insure it just with their $100,000 limit.  they're gonna need some other way to make sure that their assets are safe.  [music] 
[music]  next, let's consider the evidence for hypothesis 2,  that government failure was the primary driver of the housing crisis.  the evidence does not support this hypothesis as a main driver and  here, it's important to just have some historical perspective and  also, international perspective to see why the evidence here is weak.  first, recognize that the most significant u.s.  government involvement in the mortgage market started just after world war ii,  not in the years that led up to the crisis.  the government being involved in mortgage markets is not a new thing.  in fact, let's look at this picture.  on the top, we're going to just see the types of loan to value,  the average loan to value on government loans.  on the bottom, we're gonna look at the market share for  the federal housing administration and the veterans administration loans.  turning first to the top figure, the average loan to value on  va loans and on fha loans, which are both government guaranteed loans,  was significantly higher than the average loan to value for savings and  loan banks over the time period following world war ii.  so, here we're looking from beginning in 1945,  just as world war ii ends, and going until the end of the 1960s.  the loan to value is along the y axis.  for savings and loan institutions,  the average loan to value creeps up over time but never even hits 80%.  this is everybody putting 20% or  more down, on average, if you're just going to your local bank to borrow.  the red line shows what that average is for the fha and the blue line for the va.  the fha begins already at 80% or  more loan to value and climbs over 90% by the late 1950s.  the va, similarly, starts over 90%, and after moving around a little bit,  gets above 90% again in the late 1950s, where it stays and  continues in increases to get even above 95% by 1967.  so the va and the fha are making lots of loans with  very little money down, and this is the government that's doing the lending.  if you look at the bottom, just how much of the market did the fha and the va have?  it was an enormous amount,  and it was driven predominantly by growth in the va loans, since of course,  now we had many soldiers returning from war who are eligible for these loans.  if you combine fha and vha loans, at the end of world war ii,  it was less than a quarter of the market.  by the time we reached the early 1950s, it's about 45% of the market.  that's a level of the market that was not reached again for a very long time.  as we can see, the government has been involved, and that involvement, was very,  very heavy just after world war ii, and it is not a new phenomenon in 2000.  [music] 
[music]  so today, we're going to discuss the housing crisis, at least,  the beginning of the housing crisis.  as mentioned in the first module, riehart and roghoff,  in a very appreciant paper that was published in 2008, identified the big five  crises since world war ii that have happened in developed countries.  there was spain in 1977, norway in 1987, finland and sweden in 1991,  and japan in 1992, and they also found 13 other bank centered  crises in developed countries they identified since world war ii.  in each of these cases, we see that housing price appreciations  were very significant in the lead up to the crises.  and they're a standard feature, and actually what that showed was that as  of 2007, the united states looked to be in some trouble.  here's the picture that really makes this point that comes from their paper.  on the left axis, is an index and that index is going from, at the very bottom,  95 all the way up to 135, where the index is set to be 100 for  the very first year, which is four years before a financial crisis occurs.  the dotted line in green shows what the average house price appreciation was for  the big 5 crises, the big 5, spain, norway, sweden, finland, and japan.  and you can see here that starting from an index level of 100,  four years before the crisis, it appreciates on average  about 20% over the next four years until the crisis begins.  before time capital t, which is where the crisis actually begins,  it had already started falling a little bit, until it falls all the way back to  it's original level by three years after the crisis.  so 20% is actually a lot.  so as we saw when we looked at housing prices in the very first module,  we discussed.  housing prices are essentially flat in  many developed countries over the last 100 years or so, so you get most  of your returns from housing from the fact that you get to live in your house.  you really can't, in general, expect a lot of real house price appreciation, but 20%  over four years that's a lot, and it looks like it's coming right before a crisis.  the red dotted line, these are smaller crises on average, but  again, it's a fairly significant 10% house price appreciation  in the years before the crises.  in blue we see the united states.  this paper was published before lehman brothers.  and the data came significantly before even the bear stearns part of  the financial crises in the fact we see the peak happening in 2007.  late 2006, early 2007 is the peak of the housing market.  and it starts dipping and when they wrote the paper it had already gone up 30% and  was now down approximately 5%.  and what they said in the paper is, in 2008, this doesn't look good.  we've had even more of an appreciation than the five largest crises had prior to  their financial crisis blowing up.  so that's our backdrop and now what we're going to do is look into and  try to understand what actually went on in the housing crisis in the united states.  [music] 
[music]  housing.  housing was terrible.  it was the most frustrating thing we could have funded.  the gap between what we try to do and what we are able to achieve was largest than  in any other thing we tried to do in the crisis.  and i want to walk through why that was the case and what informed our choices,  why we did what we did, why we were unable to be more effective, more successful.  and we had one of the most creative group of people in housing  in the country working for the president at that time.  and they were not just very knowledgable about the mortgage market, but  they were very creative.  and we already demonstrated in the rest of the financial system that we were willing  to do extraordinary things, take on extraordinary risks.  and a lot of people looked at what we did in housing in contrast as being deeply in  adequate, fundamentally different.  and i think there's a lot of confusion about why such a different strategy and  why were we so ineffective, seemingly ineffective in housing.  this is just a introduction to the list of things we actually did.  we did a lot of things.  and what's remarkable about this i think is not just the number of things we did  and the fact that we kept trying over time to modify those programs,  adapt them, extend them, try to make them more powerful.  but of course ultimately they were perceived to have such weak effect  relative to the scale of the tragedy in the housing market.  this was a huge problem.  it was fundamentally a huge problem, because millions and  millions of people lost their jobs.  and in losing their jobs,  they lost the capacity to pay to meet the mortgage obligations  they had taken on in a world they thought was going to be a more stable world.  so people took on much more debt than they can afford.  and as the recession intensified and people lost their jobs and  more people lost their homes, the price of houses fell.  and millions of americans were in the position, which we hadn't  seen across the country since the great depression, where the value of their homes  was less than the value of the debt, the obligations they'd take on.  so we had three basic objectives that framed our strategy of response.  the first was to try to arrest the drop in home prices to avoid the risk of further  loss of wealth, further damage to the economy and to reduce the risk that  the housing crisis was adding more damage to an economy already deeply in recession.  in january 2009, house prices had already fallen a lot.  but if you look at the orange line on this slide, you'll see that the expectation in  the futures market was the house prices could decline another 30%.  that would have been catastrophic, make the crisis much, much worse.  so the most important thing we tried to do was to stabilize home prices,  and begin to lay the foundation for those prices to come back.  and, you can see from that line, that's what actually happened.  we were relatively effective in doing that.  house prices moved sideways for a long time before they started to come up, but  at least we avoided the calamitous further drop in home prices.  now, we did that in part,  because of the actions the fed took to lower interest rates.  we did it in part because of the actions we took to  make sure the mortgage market was still functioning.  and that the government could provide mortgages when the private sector wasn't.  second objective we had was to keep mortgage rates low to make sure  the mortgage markets were still open so that people who still had a job or  had to move could still borrow to buy a house.  again that was important because if we were allowed the mortgage market to  completely collapse, that would have dramatically amplified the recession,  caused a much deeper crisis.  so you can see just by the shaded thing that we were very effective in making sure  that rates stayed low through this period of time.  and that's probably a reflection of the fact that we made it possible for  the government mortgage providers to step in and  offset the collapse in mortgage demand.  it also made it possible for millions of americans to refinance their  mortgages to take advantage of the fallen rates.  so this shows the increase in refinancings that happened as a result  of these policies.  and it's important to note that a substantial fraction of those people were  able to refinance even when their homes were under water, even when the value of  their homes was below the obligations they'd taken on in their mortgages.  our third objective was to provide targeted relief to help prevent  foreclosures for those people that had a reasonable chance of staying in their  home, even if they'd lost some source of income, even if one spouse had lost a job.  this was in some ways the hardest thing to do because  the risk of people losing their home was enormous for  millions and millions of people at risk for losing their home.  and making judgments about whether people could afford to stay in their home or  not was a very difficult judgement,  complicated by the fact that many of these homes were second homes.  many of them were owned by investors.  many of them were actually very expensive homes.  and there were bunch of questions about fairness and  judgment that went into thinking about whose mortgage should be modified.  and who should we help actually leave their homes and  transition to other forms of housing as they tried to recover?  in doing this, we were frustrated by the fact that we had very limited tools.  we had some resources, but limited, and we had to work through a very broken,  damaged mortgage servicing business, partly why the crisis was also terrible.  when we laid out this program we estimated there were about 3 to 4 million  americans that would benefit from a modification of their mortgage,  some restructuring of their mortgage debt, some reduction in their mortgage payments.  and you can see from this that in fact we were able to help facilitate mortgage  modifications for a substantially greater number of americans,  i think roughly 8 million americans.  but a very small fraction of those mortgage modifications were provided  by the programs the government supported directly with finance.  that's probably because our conditions were a little tougher,  a little tougher on the banks and the services.  but we helped facilitate and help make it possible,  help create better incentives for the banks themselves to provide  a substantially larger number of mortgage modifications.  and that was very important and ultimately, again, very effective,  although slowly,  much more slowly than we'd like in help preventing millions of foreclosures.  why couldn't we do more?  this was one of the most frustrating things we faced.  we were operating within a set of limited discretion provided by the congress.  we tried to do as much as we could within the constraints of that authority.  and we were not able and  not successful in getting congress to relax those constraints to give us  broader authority that would have allowed a more powerful response.  we were unable, for example, to convince the congress to pass bankruptcy  reforms that have given a slightly greater mix of tools, a little more leverage  to the borrower who needed to seek some relief from their mortgage debt.  we were unable to do something that was very important in the great depression  which was to set up an entity where the government could buy mortgages on a very  large scale, restructure them, and pass on that relief directly to the home owner.  we considered but were unable to get support for  a much broader mortgage-free financing program.  there were lots of such ideas out there.  one of those ideas was to give any american the ability to refinance  their mortgage,  their existing mortgage at a 3.5% or 4% mortgage guaranteed by the government.  that would have been expensive, but it required legislation.  and we were unable to provide broad-based principal  reduction directly or through the gses.  we couldn't compel the gses themselves to provide that legislation.  so we had limited resources and limited authority.  and that was partly why the response was so  frustratingly inadequate relative to the pain that so many people were facing.  it's not clear, though, how effective broader programs might have been  in the face of the most fundamental cause of the pain in housing,  which just was the millions of people who had lost their jobs.  this is a chart that shows the cost of measures designed to help  create a job, a new job, help somebody find a job that lost a job,  help prevent somebody from losing a job in the first place.  so, you can see these things are expensive.  if you look at these estimates provided for the various pieces of stimulus we  provided in the crisis, you can see what the cost per job was.  this is a measure of the efficiency of protections we put in place in the crisis.  and what's important about this is that measures designed to reduce  the value of principal of home owners were very, very expensive.  it's one reason why they were not that popular on capitol hill, and one  reason why you might want to think about about it if you had limited resources.  even if you had hundreds of billions of dollars, how you might want to use those  resources to give you the maximum power in reaching the greatest number of people.  and improving the odds they could navigate through this recession with less  financial loss.  let's take a look at where we are today.  what this chart shows in blue is the increase in the value of homes and  people's equity in their homes as the economy recovered and  these programs started to get more traction.  and the line in yellow shows the share of the borrowers who are underwater.  so, this things has come down dramatically, they're still pretty high.  but that's one measure of what we were ultimately able to do.  note how slowly it happened, and how long it took to get traction.  this shows that households have actually brought down the amount of debt they  borrowed relative to income.  but the amount of debt outstanding is still relatively high in  comparison at least to the pre-crisis levels.  this shows the magnitude of the reduction in people who were behind in their  mortgages and loans and foreclosure.  again, very substantial reduction, but it took a long time for that to happen,  and we're still at levels that reflect a lot of damage.  so again, this just shows the full scale of the things we did.  you can evaluate policy by the ultimate impact of what we did,  and you can evaluate by how we use the authority we had.  and you can evaluate it by whether we were successful in relaxing the constraints  that existed on that authority.  we did a pretty good job of being creative,  although we're much slower than we would have liked in using the tools we had.  and over time, we were able to have a substantial impact.  but the size of the problem was much greater than the size of those tools,  the power of those tools, size of the resources we had.  and we were not effective,  very unsuccessful, in relaxing the constraints on authority that  played such an important role in limiting the scale of what we could do in housing.  we've left a better toolkit of programs you can use.  there should be less lags if people have to respond in the future to this crisis,  a lot to learn in the mistakes we made.  and hopefully that'll leave people with a better position to make better choices  in the future.  [music] 
[music]  all right.  what other evidence do we have about hypothesis 1?  another piece of evidence is that mortgage defaults  seem actually to be unrelated to rate resets.  this is very important, but what does it mean?  so, in an earlier module we talked about adjustable rate mortgages.  in an adjustable rate mortgage, you start off with a relatively low rate.  because it's only going to be fixed for a short period of time, typically two years.  so we have a two year mortgage, where you will have a fixed interest rate and  then after two years is over, that interest rate will adjust.  and it will adjust to relative to whatever interest rates look like at that time.  so, one thing that is often discussed as  sub-prime loans being designed to fail is the idea that you're starting people with  a very low rate, but then after two years that rate is going to jump up much higher.  and unless they can pay that much higher rate, they're either going to end up in  foreclosure or they will have to refinance their mortgage.  and if they refinance their mortgage then they may have to pay a penalty rate.  so it seems some combination of you're trying to fool people  because this all won't come down the road for a couple of years.  what does it look like?  what we would expect to see in this world, if these types of loans were designed  to fail, would be that for the first two years they wouldn't fail and then there  would be a reset in the rate and you would see a burst of failure at that time.  let's take a look at the evidence on that.  these pictures also come from the foote, gerardi, and willen study.  and now, what we're gonna do is we're gonna break up these sub-prime  adjustable rate mortgage loans into three different groups based on their vintage.  the vintage is when the loans were taken out.  in the top-left corner is the january 2005 vintage.  so these are adjustable-rate mortgages taken out in january 2005 and  set to reset with their new interest rate two years later in january 2007.  on the top right is the vintage from january 2006,  which is set to reset in january 2008.  and on the bottom is the january 2007 vintage,  which will have its reset in january of 2009.  so let's now look at the evidence.  first for january 2005.  on the left hand axis is the interest rate, and we see  that these loans on average were taken out with an interest rate between 7 and 8%.  on the right hand axis is the default rate.  and along the bottom, on the x-axis, is the year.  so we start off with the blue line that's in between 7 and 8%, and then what we see  happen in january of 2007 is a large reset of four percentage points.  the interest rate goes way up after two years,  exactly the way that we would expect would cause a great increase in defaults.  now look down at the bottom at the cumulative defaults.  if you look at this line and you ask is  anything actually happening in january 2007 that's special, the answer is no.  and you can do that statistically.  but you don't need to do it statistically.  you can do it just by looking at it.  there is very little that is going on in january of 2007.  now let's turn to the january 2006 vintage.  here the interest rate begins a little bit higher, between 8 and  9% when the loans are first taken out.  and now the adjustment, which occurs in january 2008, is smaller,  because by january 2008, interest rates were lower than they had been for  the previous years adjustment, january 2007.  so there's only a slight uptick in the interest rate in january of 2008.  nevertheless, the cumulative defaults  just appear to be rising steadily throughout the entire period.  in fact, the january 2006 vintage eventually reaches  a default rate of 45%, significantly higher than the default rate for  the january 2005 vintage, which here never goes above 20%.  despite the fact that it was the january 2005 vintage that had  that 4% spike when the interest rates were reset.  final piece of evidence here really goes in the opposite direction.  here we see the january 2007 vintage.  now again, the interest rates are starting between 8 and 9%.  but at the time of their first reset, which is january 2009, by  this point the federal reserve had already reduced interest rates significantly.  and so the adjustment actually had interest rates fall.  nevertheless, if you look at the cumulative defaults  you see that the vast majority of the defaults occurred well before the reset.  and even after the reset happened,  lowering the interest rates, the cumulative default continued to increase.  once again, to be close to 45% for this entire vintage,  as compared to about 20% for the january 2005 vintage,  which in fact was the one that had this very large reset.  taken together, it is very, very difficult to look at these three figures or  to do any statistical work on these figures, and  to come to the conclusion that the reset itself had any effect on default rates.  [music] 
[music]  turning next to the evidence of what actually happened in the 2000s,  or that part of hypothesis 2 is that it is the fair housing goals of  the government sponsored enterprises that drove a lot of  the increase in subprime lending from 2003 to 2007.  so what is the evidence for this?  first, note they were indeed the government sponsored  enterprises were indeed a major participant in non-prime mortgage markets.  it's important to recognize that they were buyers of mortgages.  they were not direct lenders or guarantors.  so unlike for prime loans, where the government sponsored enterprises  can guarantee the timely payment of interest and  principal on the loans, they can not do that for sub-prime loans.  they can,  however buy them in the secondary market and hold them in their portfolio.  now, no doubt designing a government agency that can go out and  borrow with the implicit and then later explicit guarantee of the government.  and take that money and buy any kind of security that is risky  is really not a sound government policy.  it doesn't make sense to do that, and  in fact, that was most certainly a contributor  to the eventual problems that we had at the government sponsored enterprises.  but right now we're asking a different question.  we're asking, yes, we know that the gse has made some bad bets and  the gse has ended up in trouble.  but did they themselves, through their activity,  fuel the boom in subprime lending?  was it their activity that meant that everybody could go out and get loans?  so let's see what the evidence looks like for that.  you can see, looking at the slide, how it would be easy, if you only have  part of the picture, to get a sense that the governments participation,  the government's role in creating the subprime crisis was very pronounced.  but that is misleading.  first, let's look at what's going on just with the government share of the subprime  market.  so by itself just how much of all the subprime origination  that's going on that particular year, the gse end up owning.  we start in 2000, where it is just under 20%.  and then it rises in 2002 to be about just under 40% where  it stays approximately stable over the next three years.  falls a little bit from 2005 to 2006 and then explodes from 2006 to 2007.  looking only at that explosion, in that very last year, one might  think that the government had just pushed into these markets in an enormous way.  but now let's layer onto this another line.  this line now shows on the right hand side axis,  the total amount of subprime originations.  first going back to 2000 you can see, this total is below about $100 billion.  it's actually quite small compared to what we see going on later.  so recall that it was a legal change in 1992.  fair housing rules in 1992 that some commentator blamed for  the government getting very, very involved in subprime housing.  but as of 2000, the stakes here are relatively small,  compared to the overall mortgage market.  so eight years after the law's passed we're still only at about 100 billion.  now that grows but it really doesn't explode until 2004 as  we get right in the middle of the global savings glut period.  from 2004 to 2006, we see subprime originations approximately  between $600 and $700 billion per year.  the government share of this market during this time  starting in 2004 actually slides a bit from 2004 to 2006.  so during the most active period in subprime originations,  the government shares are actually falling slightly.  now the rapid increase from 2006 to 2007  coincides with a huge shrinking, a rapid shrinking of the overall market.  if you look only at the government share,  it appears wow they have 80% of the market.  but in fact the total participation that they  had in 2007 is roughly of the same level that it had in the previous years.  it's just that all other sources of subprime mortgage financing had dried up.  so its misleading to look at only one part of this picture.  looking at the whole picture, it appears that while the government was a player,  the timing of them being a player really coincides with the global savings glut,  when there's a huge amount of demand for safe assets.  and in fact during that time it was private sources that were making  up the majority and in fact a growing majority of the financing.  going beyond a us based perspective,  it is important to remember things that we have seen in earlier module.  which is that many countries had housing booms  prior to the global financial crisis.  ireland had a housing boom, spain had a housing boom.  these countries, however did not have the united states' policies.  so there's a tendency when we look at the crisis that happened in  the united states to ascribe a lot of what went on to having kind of a bias to  looking just at the united states.  but a lot of these things were going on in other countries and  the timing of policies in these other countries are not going to be anywhere  near the same thing as the timing of policies in the united states.  to take perspective on this we have to ask,  what is it that was common to all of these countries?  one thing that was common to all these countries was  a global macroeconomic situation of a savings glut.  [music] 
[music]  let's turn now to the evidence for hypothesis 3.  and we will see this explanation,  this hypothesis is consistent with preponderance of the evidence.  we've eluded to some of it already and let me just look at a few more things now.  first the demand side.  home owners and whether or  not they are thinking will house prices continue to go up.  one thing that we know about home owners and about retail  investors in general is that they are prone to extrapolate recent trends.  and there's a survey of what is likely to  happen to house prices, and house prices here are based on the case-shiller index.  this is a well-put-together index that gives us both national and  city-by-city of trends in what's going on in housing prices.  as the bull accelerated in 2003, the expectations of future increases,  in the case-shiller index were far above their historical averages.  so here's some survey evidence.  unfortunately, we don't really have survey evidence that precedes the build up,  because we didn't really have a good index until then.  but right around this time in 2002, 2003, we start to get some survey  evidence, in this case from a firm called pulsonomics,  of what to expect for housing prices over the next 10 years.  so they are surveying thousands and thousands of people.  and what do they find?  as of 2004, just as we're really seeing the amount of lending explode,  the average expectation for ten year home price increases were 12%.  now again remember over the previous 100 years or  so, before the great buildup to the housing crisis.  real home prices are approximately flat.  so thinking that they're gonna go up 12% in the next ten years is quite bold.  now over the years that follow, this euphoria falls, but only slightly.  even in 2008, as the financial crisis is beginning,  the expectations of home price rises are approximately 8% over the following years.  if you expect your home price to go up, that's gonna be a pretty good darn reason  to decide to make a bet, to take out a loan, and to buy a house,  even if you think after a few years, you might have to refinance that loan.  and that's what the evidence shows.  turning next to the mortgage supply side,  what did the seemingly sophisticated investors who were making these loans,  or who were ultimately buying them, what did they think?  in an earlier lesson of this module,  we already saw that actually they lost a lot of money and had a lot of exposure.  but what did they think?  is there any way to know whether they had the belief or  they really understood what was going on?  and in fact, what we do see is that they did understand that if there was a housing  downturn, it would have a very, very bad effect on mortgage-backed securities.  so that's effectively math.  you design these securities.  and you're designing them, if you recall from our discussion of securitization,  so that there's a nice layer of protection.  so that if you have the triple a tranche of a mortgage-backed security,  prices need to fall a significant amount before it's going to hurt you.  they understood that as we will see.  they just didn't think that it was very likely.  so let's take a look at, this is just two examples of reports.  extracts from reports.  the first is from lehman brothers and the second is from jp morgan.  and the lehman brothers report kind of  breaks out some different scenarios for what could happen to housing prices.  so this is the top half of the exhibit that you're now looking at.  on the left-hand side, you kinda have their cases.  so, the top case is an aggressive case, and  that scenario is an 11% rise in housing prices, over  the life of some pool of mortgage-backed securities that were put together.  their second case would be an 8% rise over the course of those loans,  and then what they call their base case, which is that housing  price appreciation actually slows to 5% by the end of 2005.  then a pessimistic case and their pessimistic case is 0%.  so already the language that their using suggests that perhaps they're not well  calibrated to history, just in terms of percentages.  and we'll see that, too, because the pessimistic case  would really be the reality for many of the previous decades.  and then what they call a meltdown case, 5% drop per year for  the next three years, and then an increase in 5% per year after that.  now, what make this most interesting, in addition to the language,  are the probabilities that they assign to each of these cases.  their base case in the middle gets a 50% probability.  all the way at the bottom is the melt down case.  and in the meltdown case, they're assigning a 5% probability.  a 5% probability for  dropping by 5% over the next three years, and then 5% thereafter.  now, if you look all the way on the right hand side column,  it tells you what the losses would be to the mortgage backed securities,  or all pooled mortgage backed securities in each of these cases.  they do understand at the bottom there's a fair amount of losses, 17.1%.  the real problem, though, is that they assign such a low probability for  that happening.  only 5%.  and it's not just leeman brothers.  leeman brothers of course we know failed, so  perhaps it's not that surprising that they got the probabilities wrong.  the bank that did the best during the crisis is jp morgan.  let's just look at a few extracts down at the bottom from jp morgan analysts.  these are views on house price appreciation.  and the title of the report, or  the blurb that would come out describing these views, is given over on the right.  and the date of the report is all the way on the left and  it draws from data that is given in the second column.  so for example, in december 2006, with data drawn through october of 2006,  the title of the report is more widespread declines with early stabilization signs.  so it was indeed in 2006,  that observers of the market were seeing a broad based declines in housing.  so we didn't have to wait for the crisis that began in 2007 to see that.  housing was already weak towards the end of 2006.  but right away we see early stabilization signs.  you look at the next line, one month later, continuing declines,  with stronger stabilization signs.  okay then.  one month later, tentative stabilization in home price appreciation.  one month after that.  continued stabilization in home price appreciation, and  then jumping ahead six months, near bottom on home price appreciation,  that's data through july 2007.  the housing crisis really beings in earnest or rather the financial crisis  that came from the housing crisis begins in earnest in august of 2007.  right before there, we see near bottom on home price appreciation.  just two months later we get an all caps ugly.  by then it was clear that we were on the way down.  but before that, in the years leading up to the worst parts of the housing crisis,  broadly across all of the evidence that we have seen in this module,  insiders had a lot of exposure.  insiders lost an enormous amount of money.  and they were telling themselves,and their investors,  that things were likely not going to get that bad.  so we can ask if this is what we see, if indeed there was a bubble, and  that bubble came out really between 2003 and 2007.  why, why then?  the simplest explanation for why then is that there was a global macroeconomic  condition leading to enormous demand for these underlying securities.  housing bubbles, indeed asset bubbles in general, are always lurking.  and the longer we go without having one, the fewer people will be immune  to thinking that a bubble will go on and on forever.  the spark that lights this fire is just lots and  lots of investors willing to take these things onto their portfolios.  [music] 
[music]  let's turn next to a second case study, iceland,  which unfortunately for all of the writing that's done on this particular subject,  differs from ireland only by one letter.  however, it's a different country in terms of size, tiny, only about 320,000 people.  as i stand here in the state of connecticut,  thought of as a very small state within the united states,  this would still be less than 10% of the population of our state.  this small country is dominated, at the time, by three banks, glitnir,  kaupthing, and landsbanki, which are collectively referred to as gkl.  gkl engaged in a lending boom during the 2000s,  the same time that many other countries and  banks observed that there were large pools of cash looking for places to go.  this picture shows us the total assets at these three gkl banks  relative to iceland's gross domestic product.  in 2003, those total assets were two times gdp.  this is already fairly large,  although one could argue iceland was essentially a financial center.  a small one, but having two times gdp, which in this particular case  would be about two times what the ratio would be in the united states, wasn't  completely out of whack with what you would see with other bank heavy countries.  this grows significantly, however,  during the global savings glut period, until we see by june of 2008,  the assets at just these three banks were ten times the gdp of iceland.  this is clearly not something that the government could support in a crisis, and  this was well understood by markets.  the lending boom was filled, as you would expect,  by various types of outside of iceland funding, and  that funding had a bit of a crisis early on in february, 2006,  before we see even the first hint of panic in the united states or in the eurozone.  i should point out, iceland is not in the eurozone.  iceland is a small country.  it has its own currency.  it is in the european economic area so it has various free trade agreements  with the rest of the european union, but it is not using the euro.  and that distinction will turn out to be important.  however, in february, 2006, it was something that added to the nervousness  that some foreign investors had on the icelandic system.  these three glk banks were funding themselves largely through the wholesale  funding markets that later would get united states and  euro area banks into trouble.  there was pushback on this in february of 2006, and  so the banks turned to a different type of external funding,  online accounts that went up under various names.  ice save, which was landsbanki's product, edge for kaupthing, and  save and save for glitnir.  these were accounts that you could open from anywhere in europe, and  the legal structures of them varied.  sometimes they were domicile locally,  sometimes they were branches of the icelandic bank.  but they were very, very heavily advertised, and  they paid higher rates that you could get at your local banks.  so many, many depositors signed up  to deposit their money in these online accounts at the icelandic banks.  this you would expect to be relatively fast moving money.  these are not people with loyalty towards these icelandic banks.  much as we saw with northern rock, when their online and  postal accounts were the earliest retail accounts and the strongest retail accounts  to run, we're going to see potential runs happening in these online accounts,  because we have depositors chasing rates and certainly ready to run,  since they feel no loyalty towards the banks.  this picture shows the pattern of what went on at the gkl banks.  it shows credit default spreads on five year senior bonds for  each of the banks, as compared to an overall index in europe.  once again, we seek credit default swaps, and we don't need to get into their  details, except to just think of them as being a measure, a proxy for riskiness.  credit default swaps are a form of insurance.  this is what it would cost to insure yourself against the default  of senior bonds, high in the capital structure bonds, at each of these banks.  we see the three different banks each represented by a different color, but  moving quite in tandem.  and first, in february of 2006, we can see the first spike up,  that's the spike that you see in the earliest part of the picture.  and that's where there was pressure on their wholesale funding sources,  and they needed to come up with these new products of the online bank accounts.  there, we see the credit default swaps settling down somewhat.  however, they're still higher than an index in purple at the bottom  of banks throughout europe.  the credit default swaps continue to fall until, of course, the financial crisis  starts to hit in earnest, and this happens in the middle of 2007.  and in the middle of 2007, we start to see an explosion in the credit default  swaps for each of these banks as wholesale funding worldwide starts to collapse.  after the northern rock run of september 2007,  there's increased pressure on all of these banks.  and now, the online accounts begin a slow run,  these days called in many different contexts a bank jog.  after lehman brothers, the jog turned into a sprint, and  gkl were unable to keep up their short term funding,  either from wholesale markets or from their online accounts.  iceland nationalized all three banks over the week of october 6th.  but nationalized doesn't mean that they're going to pay off all their depositors.  quite clearly, they could not.  their deposit fund would be insufficient to pay everyone back, and so  they made a very controversial decision to pay back only their domestic customers.  the united kingdom and the netherlands made their own depositors whole.  they were not legally obligated to do so, but  because of the legal structure of the accounts,  iceland was not legally obligated under laws of those countries either.  those countries, however, were not pleased,  feeling that iceland had reneged specifically on debts to their citizens.  in an either mildly humorous or mildly sad development,  her majesty's treasury in the united kingdom placed iceland on a watch list  of current regimes that were effectively considered to be rogue organizations.  this is not a great list to be on.  at the top, is al-qaeda and taliban, and  then down about halfway, is the icelandic landsbanki bank.  [music] 
[music]  irish deflation during the eurozone crisis is an example of an internal devaluation.  ireland is effectively lowering the prices and  wages in their country relative to what we see in the rest of the eurozone in there.  they're doing it price by price and wage by wage.  that can happen also within other countries.  so for example in the united states we can get an internal devaluation if when  there's a shock to connecticut, connecticut starts to see deflation  relative to other parts of the united states.  in fact, such types of internal devaluations are very rare.  and they're rare because most of the time, within an optimal currency area, we're  able to use the other forms of adjustment in order to take care of the problem.  but looking forward, if the euro zone is to survive, they're gonna need some form  of price changes that differ across germany and greece, for example.  how common are these historically?  they're very rare, especially since 1990.  this picture from jay shambaugh's paper that we discussed in the previous module.  this shows us how many episodes would beat various criteria for  internal devaluations over the last 50 years.  at the top, we look just at 26 mostly developed countries.  countries that would qualify as being developed on various scales.  and the first line after that tells us how many  internal devaluations there have been since 1964.  and the three columns that follow that give us various definitions for  internal devaluations.  3% over one year, 5% over three years or 7% over five years.  and here an internal devaluation is defined as  a fall in the country's overall price level relative to world prices,  that is not accompanied by a nominal depreciation of the country's currency.  so, we're not going to depreciate our currency instead,  we're gonna have some form of deflation in most of these cases.  since 1990 however, we're seeing only three of these  that would have 3% internal devaluations over one year,  six examples with 5% over three years and three examples with 7% over five years.  that is compared to what you see in the next row which is all devaluations  since 1964 and in the following row all devaluations since 1990.  so, looking at that last row, we see there've been 114 cases  of devaluations, of your overall currency falling by 3% over a one-year period.  that will restore a certain amount of competitiveness.  however it's very rare to see that done through an adjustment of prices directly.  if you share a currency with other countries  the only way you can do it is with an internal devaluation.  looking down at the bottom of the table we're just going to restrict ourselves  to members of currency unions.  so an example of members of currency unions are united states  metropolitan areas.  so we're in a currency union of the dollar.  how common is it in the time period since 1961, which is in that next row,  or in the time period just since 1990, to see an internal devaluation.  to see one metro area in the united states actually have its internal prices  fall by 3% over one year or 5% over three years or  7% over five years relative to the rest of its currency union.  well, since 1990 the 3% over one year has happened exactly zero times.  and the other two columns, once 5% over three years and 7% over five years.  within the euro area countries it has also happened one time since 1999.  it is rare,  it is especially rare when compared to the triple digit lines which we see above.  which is doing it simply with a devaluation of your currency.  a single currency places restrictions on a country's ability to adjust and one  hopes that the advantages of that single currency will outweigh the problems.  and that can happen until we hit a shock.  and it is exactly that shock that happened in the global financial crisis.  [music] 
[music]  >> we've seen a lot of information now on what happened to ireland and  to iceland following the shock of the global financial crisis.  comparing the performance of these two countries,  ireland that was in the euro zone.  and had to stick with the euro currency the entire time.  and with the austerity policies that were imposed upon ireland for  their ability to receive a bailout, as compared to iceland  which didn't receive a bailout, simply reneged on their debts.  and then managed to devalue their currency because they are not in the euro zone.  what we saw was that both from the real gdp and  unemployment perspective, iceland recovered much faster than ireland.  from a government perspective the deficits in iceland fell back towards zero much  faster than they did in ireland even though ireland was under  pressure to bring them back towards zero.  and finally and most important really for understanding the dynamics of these crisis  is that iceland was able to devalue their currency and have some inflation.  the inflation enabled them to restore competitiveness with other countries.  ireland was unable to do that.  and in something that happens very rarely in an era of paper currency,  saw actual deflation.  deflation being the only way that they could attempt to restore  some sort of competitiveness with other countries.  deflation however by itself adds to the burden already seen with austerity,  making it more expensive for people who have debts to pay them back and  making it more difficult for anybody who is considering an investment in that  country to see the return on their investment  [music] 
[music]  >> the global financial crisis, overall, has given us an interesting experiment to  look at to see what it means to have your own currency when faced by this shock.  and that experiment allows a continuation for  us of the conversation we had in the previous module about ireland and  iceland during the global financial crisis.  so these are two countries that, while different in size,  are both relatively small countries compared to europe.  and their main difference other than the one second letter of their countries name  is that one of them, ireland, is in the eurozone, uses the euro as their currency.  and the other, iceland,  while part of a common economic area with europe, has their own currency.  look at few pictures to see how the countries reacted  after the shock of the global financial crisis.  the blue bar shows us what was going on in iceland and the green bar,  of course, shows us what's going on in ireland.  in 2005, 2006 and in 2007, real gdp growth in both of these countries was strung.  so, we're over 6% in 2005 and  between 4 and 6% in both countries in 2006 and 2007.  2008 begins the difficult period of the global financial crisis,  and ireland has negative growth and iceland is barely positive in those years.  both countries in 2009 have severe negative growth rates.  and in 2010, iceland does worse than ireland and  has a growth rate of negative 4%.  now, if you recall from the discussion that we had of iceland and  ireland in the previous module, iceland's reaction to the crisis  was to recognize there was no way they were gonna be able to support their banks.  their banking system was, just at their three largest banks,  ten times larger than the gdp of the entire country.  and so they effectively did not pay back depositors in countries  outside of iceland.  they reneged on their debts, and they had a very,  very rapid depreciation of their currency.  in 2011, 12, and 13, iceland began to recover, and by 2013,  their growth rate was already back at a very solid level of over 3%.  ireland, on the other hand, had a reaction to the crisis, which was to  guarantee the debts of seven covered banks, the largest banks in ireland.  the government initially did that with an attempt to come with  the strongest possible response, which is a very logical approach,  to try to restore confidence during a financial crisis.  unfortunately, they just didn't have the level of resources to  be able to back up such a promise.  and so what began as a banking crisis, that started as a housing crisis in  ireland, then led to a sovereign debt crisis.  ultimately, as we've seen in a previous lesson of this module,  ireland had to ask for a bailout from the eurozone and  received an 85 billion euro bailout in november of 2010.  now, this bailout came with certain restrictions and  certain requirements, including austerity policies in ireland.  so we look at what happens now, as we go from 2010 forward in ireland.  in 2011, ireland appears to be recovering, but then the double-dip  recession that took place throughout the eurozone affects ireland deeply.  in 2012, their growth is approximately zero, and  in 2013 their growth is negative.  overall, ireland had the constraints of the single currency.  they're unable to become a much more competitive country simply by making  all of their prices lower at one time by devaluing their currency,  which is exactly what iceland did.  [music] 
[music]  we turn next to the details of what the governments were able to do,  what happened to the governments in the aftermath of the crisis.  in iceland and ireland leading up to the global financial crisis,  both countries are in surplus.  this is a very important point, a lot of the discussion about  the sovereign debt component of the eurozone crisis, talks about  the the countries as though they are all the same and they are all very profitable.  that's simply not true, there are many countries within the euro zone that were  running surpluses leading up to what later became a crisis.  ireland and iceland are two examples of that.  ireland running a primary surplus in the years leading up to to the crisis and  iceland running an even larger one, at nearly 5% of gdp,  approximately 5% of gdp in each of the years, 2005, 2006 and 2007.  starting in 2008, we see that both the icelandic and irish  governments took very large hits and there was a fair amount of deficit spending that  was necessary and that the governments themselves were under pressure.  so we see in 2008 and 2009, both iceland and  ireland have significant budget deficits.  in 2010, just as ireland's worst part of the crisis is happening for  ireland, they are running more than a 30% government budget deficit.  this is what led them to require and ask for  the large 85 billion euro bailout that they received in november of 2010.  they're forced through the rules of that bailout to have to do the very best  they can to reduce their deficit in future years.  and we see them attempting to do that.  but nevertheless, despite all of the pressure that they were under for  austerity policies, simply wasn't possible for  them to be able to balance their budget over the next three years.  they're trying very hard to balance their budget and they can't,  because of the difficulties that they face from the weak economic conditions.  iceland, which has the flexibility and  correctly does some deficit spending in order to help the economy recover,  doesn't need to do anywhere near the level of deficit spending that  ireland is forced to do simply because of their economic weakness.  we move next to the unemployment rate, perhaps a more visceral way  to see the economic weakness than just focusing on gross domestic product.  once again in the three years leading up to the crisis, 2005,  6 and 7, we see that ireland and iceland both have fairly low unemployment rates.  recall that europe in general typically has higher unemployment rates,  just in normal times, than we'd see in the united states.  economists made a variety of reasons for that, but  we don't think these are significant problems.  ireland and iceland are actually pretty low.  ireland is just over 4%.  that would even be low in the united states.  and iceland is just about 2%.  in 2008, the unemployment rates in both countries begin to rise,  and from 2008 to 2010, they're rising  about the same in both of those countries at approximately the same rate.  following 2010, however, just as the impact  of the double dipper session was seen on gdp, we see it on the employment rate.  in ireland that rate continues to increase, increasing into 2011 and 2012,  until it stands at about 14%.  in iceland, the unemployment rate recovers after 2010.  dropping from just under 8% to just under 6% by 2013.  finally we look at the inflation rate.  you'll recall from an earlier discussion, when we talked in an earlier lesson in  this module about what it means to be an optimal currency area, we talked about how  if you don't have labor mobility, and if you don't have fiscal federalism,  the only way that you can actually get an adjustment is by having deflation.  and that's exactly what we see in ireland.  so ireland, leading up to the years of the global financial crisis,  has the same inflation as you would see in the rest of the euro zone.  and they're just moving along with that level of inflation.  now what we see by 2009 and 2010 is actually negative inflation or  deflation, something that is extremely rare with fiat non-metallic money.  so everybody now in ireland who borrowed to buy a house during the boom period,  is now facing the same mortgage that they had before, but lower on average wages.  in iceland on the other hand, they devalued their currency.  when you devalue your currency, everything that you import, and  in iceland, being a small country, doesn't make everything that it consumes.  everything that you import is now going to cost more in your local currency  than it did before.  this is a one time attempt to say we're going to cut the value of our currency,  so now we used to perhaps be able to buy  1 euro with 10 unit of our currency  now it requires us 12 or 13 units of our currency to buy one euro.  anyone who's in that kind of a situation means they, themselves,  are gonna have to pay more in their currency to get anything  that they've imported from a place where that is produced paying in euros.  that's going to cause inflation, and  the inflation rate in iceland jumps up in 2008 and 2009.  but that inflation rate subsequently makes all icelandic goods and  services more competitive when sold abroad.  so if it used to be, just as the prices of imports go up,  i'm now going to import less, and the price of my exports now goes down, because  producing them in my country, paying my wages, which are going to have a lower  value relative to the euro, is going to make it easier for me to sell abroad.  that simple type of adjustment, which makes it easier to export, and  makes it more expensive to import,  shows up in the inflation statistics that you can see in this picture,  are exactly what it takes for a country to be able to restore competitiveness.  the alternative is to just instead of deciding to pay everybody less  all at once, to slowly grind down everybody's wages and  prices until you become competitive, which runs into the problems of exactly what  we've talked about with regards to the debt that exists in that country.  [music] 
[music]  we turn next to a careful study of what happened in ireland,  specifically during the global financial crisis period.  the build up is a familiar story.  in the 2000s, loans increased much faster than gdp.  that's seen clearly in this picture.  on the left-hand axis, y axis, are the total amount of loans and  advances to customers by covered banks.  that's going to be a specific set of seven large banks in ireland between 2000 and  2008.  and you see here we're going to compare this to the gdp.  so we begin in 2000,  with a total amount of loans approximately equal to the level of gdp in ireland.  loans grow a bit faster, and  then during this always interesting global savings glut period of 2003 to 2007.  when it was particularly easy to raise money from abroad the gap between gdp and  total lending begins to explode.  until we reach 2008, just before the worst part of the global financial crisis,  where total amount of lending is  over 400 billion euros compared to irish gdp which is only at 180 billion.  this build up was faster that the rest of europe  which was also seeing a bit of a lending boom.  this graph compares ireland,  the rest of the euro area, of which ireland was a part and the united kingdom  which of course sits right next to ireland but is not a member of the euro area.  so, ireland actually looks more like an extreme version of the united kingdom  than it does like its fellow euro users in the euro area.  as a percentage of gdp, we start in 2000  at the total amount of lending of about 100% and  that rises to nearly 300% by 2008.  this is lending now, slightly different than the earlier picture that we saw  which includes lending to households,  non-financial corporations, financial institutions and the government.  in the euro area we start out actually a little bit higher than we do in ireland  with i said about 150% and that climbs to 200% by 2008.  that's a fairly significant increase, but placed on the same side-by-side picture as  what happened in ireland and the uk, it looks like a much more subtle increase.  in the united kingdom, we begin below 150%, and we rise to somewhere over 250%,  but never reaching the heights that we see in ireland.  as we have seen in the united states, and  as we have seen in many other countries in the past, such fast lending tends to move  hand in hand with a housing boom, and that is exactly what happened in ireland.  this picture shows the housing boom very tightly with housing prices.  we build more when the prices go up.  we know that during the 2003 to 2007 period,  where we see the sharpest increase in the blue bars,  was the time when the lending was increasing most rapidly in ireland.  this chart takes us all the back to 1976.  with on the y axis, thousands of  units of housing construction on the left-hand side.  and on the right-hand side, y axis, the index of housing prices.  as you recall, we have spoken in earlier modules about how in the united states at  least, housing prices stay relatively steady over very long periods of time.  the types of increases that we see here where the index was close  to 100 in the mid 90s, and rose to nearly 400 or  over 400 by 2006 is simply remarkable by historical standards.  and you can also see,  because the black line shows us sitting right on top of the blue bars,  that the house prices are moving very very closely with construction.  so as house prices go up construction responds by building more housing.  now to fund all of this the banks turn to non traditional funding sources.  if you recall, northern rock, we discussed in an earlier module,  we discussed as a microcosm of the overall global financial crisis.  because as it ran out of local deposits, it was forced to go elsewhere to  the wholesale lending market in order to fuel all of the lending that it was doing.  ireland is like northern rock writ large.  this picture shows the gap between the total amount of deposits taken in  by the covered banks, seven large banks in ireland,  between 2002 and 2008, and the total amount of loans that they were giving.  this gap is 26 billion euros at the beginning of the period and  rises to 129 billion euros by the end.  a hundred billion of euros needs to be found from abroad for a country,  remember at this time, has a total gdp of about 180 billion euros.  this would be the equivalent in the united states, for example, of far and  lending, increasing, far and borrowing increasing seven or  eight trillion dollars over this same time period.  it's a monumental song and when those loans came, when that wholesale  lending came due, it became an enormous problem for the irish banking system.  so how did the government react?  two weeks after the lemun failure,  irish banks were on the precipice, unable to fund this external gap  that had grown by an additional 100 billion euros during the boom.  on september 30th, 2008, the irish government made the most  powerful response of any nation during the global financial crisis.  guaranteeing all liabilities for seven covered banks for  a total of 375 billion or about two times irish gdp.  now, what makes this very interesting is that there  are some doctrines about how to respond to a global financial crisis.  that suggest doing exactly this, which is take the strongest, most possible,  most powerful way that you can respond to the crisis.  problem is, you need to be able to back that up.  and, in this particular case, it was quite clear,  very quickly to the foreign investing market.  that 375 billion dollars or more than 375 billion euros,  or more than 200% of gdp of ireland,  was just too big of a burden for that government to bear.  ultimately, ireland required an international bailout in november of 2010.  we will discuss much more about this in the next module.  [music] 
[music]  the pivotal event of the panic phase of the financial crisis was the bankruptcy of  lehman brothers on september 15th, 2008.  the details around this event  are going to be discussed by secretary geitner in his lecture of the next module.  i'm just gonna lay out some of the facts today that can serve as background and  connect with some of the other things that we've been talking about over the last  few modules.  first, is to recognize that as of march 2008,  the situation at lehman brothers was just as precarious as it was at bear stearns.  perhaps lehman only survived longer than bear stearns because some shady accounting  made them look a little better than reality at that time.  it was a little bit the case in march of 2008 that one of the five major  investment banks, lehman, merrill lynch, bear stearns,  morgan stanley, or goldman sachs, was likely to be in trouble.  lehman brothers and bear stearns were the ones that were considered the most likely  to be in trouble.  it so happened that bear stearns went first but  it just as easily could have been lehman brothers at that time.  there was a recognition on the part of both some stakeholders in lehman brothers,  but not all, and certainly, among regulators that lehman brothers was  unlikely to survive over the coming months unless they got some  extra support from the market and raised some additional capital.  that's something that was floating around in conversations between the leadership of  lehman brothers and the government during the following six months.  one thing that the federal reserve did to try to help lehman brothers and  the other at this time,  three standalone investment banks was to create the primary dealer credit facility.  the pdcf, something that secretary geithner will discuss in his lecture.  the point of the pdcf was to provide liquidity to non-bank  dealers like lehman brothers that they did not get in the past.  so when a commercial bank,  when a traditional commercial bank needs liquidity, when they need to borrow funds,  they're able to go to the discount window at the federal reserve.  they may go to the federal reserve and they may borrow by putting up collateral.  prior to march of 2008,  this was an option that was not available to the investment banks.  bear stearns did not have the ability to go and use the discount window.  in fact, when the bear stearns' rescue was arranged, the way that lending was made to  bear stearns, in large part, was by bear stearns giving their collateral over to  jp morgan and jp morgan bringing it to the discount window.  after the pdcf was created,  lehman brothers was able to make use of it, and they did.  over the next six months, they tried to get rid of their worst assets,  some from sales, to improve their capital liquidity position.  and during that time, when the markets wouldn't lend to them,  they were often borrowing from the primary dealer credit facility.  as we head into the fateful weekend, just before they declared bankruptcy,  that as of september 10, 2008, lehman reported $28 billion  in shareholder equity, $4 billion higher than it had been a year earlier.  unfortunately, it's just impossible for  us to know whether this equity cushion was accurate.  and that's because lehman brothers, like all these large financial institutions,  had an enormous balance sheet, and  many of the assets on that balance sheet are hard to value.  for example, they reported $54 billion in real estate assets.  some market participants thought that the true value of those real estate assets was  approximately half of that.  so if that $54 billion in real estate was really only worth $27 billion,  that would wipe out virtually all of the shareholder equity that they had  reported on september 10th.  generally, this uncertainty, some of which was known by markets at this time,  makes people unwillingly to lend to lehman brothers and nervous about that.  so their counterparties in derivatives, in commercial paper, and in repo were pulling  back in a variety of ways, similar to what we saw happen to bear stearns in march.  they would shorten the maturity by saying we won't lend to you anymore for  a month, now we'll only lend to you for a day.  oh, and by the way, if we're gonna lend to you for a day,  we want you to over collateralize by even more because  we're a little bit afraid the value of your collateral might fall.  we're gonna take a bigger haircut in repo transactions.  furthermore, if we're your counterparties in derivative transactions, or  other things, we're gonna ask for more collateral because we wanna make sure that  we're safe if somehow this transaction goes bad at the same time you go bankrupt.  all of that is a huge demand for cash.  the largest demand for cash of all came from jp morgan.  jp morgan was the clearing bank for lehman brothers in triparty repo.  you recall the discussion in the earlier lesson today about how repo works.  one type of repo involves three different parties.  the source of the funds, a money market mutual fund, for example,  giving $100 million over.  handing it over to a bank like jp morgan,  which stands in the middle, which then hands it over to lehman brothers and  takes custody of the collateral and manages that whole transaction.  jp morgan had served the same role for bear stearns six months earlier, and  had learned, while serving that role, that they were, in effect, a lot of danger.  because, had bear stearns suddenly declared bankruptcy in the middle  of a day, jp morgan would been stuck with a lot of the obligations.  because of that, they were particularly nervous to be in that position for  lehman brothers and they demanded in that week prior to  lehman's bankruptcy an additional $5 billion of cash from lehman brothers.  they received that on september 12th.  they continued to ask for more, for very good business reasons,  because they were simply afraid they would get caught holding the bag.  all of this pressure meant that lehman brothers, from their counterparties,  from their clearing bank, from their lenders,  really got crushed in much the same way that bear stearns did six months earlier.  and just unable to finance that enormous amount of positions that they had  of inventory, just like any business that was relying on  outside financing to be able to continue to hold its inventory.  since they had borrowed to hold such a massive inventory,  in the first place, they simply were unable to stay in business.  over the weekend of september 12th to september 14th, 2008, the u.s.  government tried unsuccessfully to arrange a private rescue for lehman brothers.  at the time, the government insisted there would be no public money  spent on the rescue, not even the kinds of promises that were made for bear stearns.  it was important, many believed, to send that message  to the markets in order to get the markets to step up and play the role.  otherwise, they would be in a waiting game to see what the government would be  willing to provide.  bank of america, which was the main candidate for  a domestic bank to do the purchase of lehman brothers,  decided instead to buy merrill lynch over that same weekend.  they believed merrill lynch was a stronger franchise, and  merrill lynch was also going to be under the same types of pressures, and so  they were looking for somebody to support them.  in this case, bank of america thought this would be the better deal for them.  this left no possible domestic buyer for lehman brothers.  so instead, the negotiators turned to barclay's,  a british bank, and they, in principle, agreed to buy lehman brothers.  but the complications of getting that deal approved by their shareholders  under the rules that they have in the united kingdom were insurmountable.  they could not be done in the time that was necessary to get lehman financed and  so the deal was effectively blocked by uk regulators.  without sufficient liquidity to operate the next day, and otherwise, out of  options, lehman filed for bankruptcy early in the morning on september 15th.  this would be the final spark that would light the powder keg  leading to the panic phase of the financial crisis.  [music] 
[music]  this graph shows the three month libor-ois spread.  that is, we're going to take the average cost for a bank to borrow,  in an unsecured way, over a three month time horizon, and subtract from that,  a proxy for what a true risk free rate would be over a three month horizon.  looking all the way to the left, which is beginning of 2007, we see that  this spread is, like its historical average, below ten basis points.  and it stays that way throughout the whole first half of 2007,  even though there's a lot of nervousness about what's going on in subprime markets.  the first jump in this spread occurs  right around the time that bnp paribas says, we're unable to  price these subprime securities in the portfolios of investment funds.  this is a major shock to the markets.  and if we recall earlier, in looking at the abx index,  around this time, prior to bnp partibas, there started to  become real uncertainty about the valuation of aaa subprime securities.  but once bnp partibas made this announcement, now suddenly,  people need to ask the question,  if bnp paribas doesn't know how to value these things, and doesn't know exactly  what's in its portfolios, is that going to be true about all banks?  certainly, bnp paribas is thought of as a sophisticated institution.  i don't know if i wanna loan to anybody else at below ten basis  points in an unsecured way.  this is a jump and it's a very important jump for  pressure that then gets placed on financial institutions  over the subsequent 13 months before the fall of lehman brothers.  basically, starting at this point, any unsecured borrowing by banks  becomes more expensive, between 50 and 100 basis points more expensive.  when you have an institution that is leveraged as highly, 25 to 1,  30 to 1, in some cases, nearly 35 to 1,  small changes in what it costs to finance the dept portion of your portfolio  can have an enormous impact overall on your returns.  we see this pressure now manifesting itself throughout the markets.  it's just a few months later, in early 2008,  when bear stearns needs to be rescued by jp morgan.  this is a different bear stearns event than what we saw in the abx picture,  which was the liquidation of their funds,  liquidation of their funds occurred in the middle of 2007.  the arrow here points to march 2008, and it occurs after,  in this particular case, the time period from august to march,  where there was enormous pressure on the interbank markets.  but still we see that the bear stearns' event by itself  does not appear to exert any independent effect on this spread.  the spread pretty much stays in this narrow range, between 50 and  100 basis points, until the lehman brothers event of september 15th, 2008.  at which point,  the libor-ois spread explodes to levels that had not been seen anytime,  in any magnitude, anywhere near this, in the history of this particular variable.  it reaches over 350 basis points.  this is the time period, in late 2008,  when perhaps if anything we are underestimating libor  due to shenanigans that were going on in these markets.  it does not calm down through the end of 2008,  still sitting well above the levels that it was at, even after bnp paribas event.  this is the picture, that to a financial economist,  summarizes what was going on in the financial crisis.  if banks cannot borrow in an unsecured way from each other,  if people are concerned about the solvency of their banks, then nobody is going to  think of the types of assets that are usually safe assets as being safe anymore.  what we are seeing here, in this picture,  is essentially a run on the banking system.  [music] 
[music]  to measure the spread of anxiety from subprime into the overall  financial system, we need a different measure than the abx.  the abx, pictures of which we've seen in earlier lessons in this module,  tell us what's happening specifically in subprime.  but they don't allow us to see how worried our market participants about the banks  themselves that may or may not have some of this subprime on their balance sheets.  that may or  may not need to bring investment vehicles back onto their balance sheets.  to do that, we need a different measure and the measure that we will use in this  course is something called the libor-ois and that is made up of two components.  it is the spread between two different things, the libor, which is  the london interbank offered rate, which is a measure of the interest rates that  banks charge each other for unsecured dollar funding over various time periods.  like overnight or one month, or three months.  it's not an actual rate,  it's not something that is reported in transactions.  rather, there is a survey that is done, or at this time, was done, of banks  saying what would it cost you to borrow in an unsecured way from other banks?  now, you may have seen in the news that some of these  survey responses were manipulated during some of this time period.  that in fact, they're not completely reliable numbers, certainly,  not at the height of the crisis in 2008.  that fact, which is most certainly true, from all of the evidence that we've seen,  does not affect the conversation that we will have in this module and  the evidence that we've seen.  those effects are relatively small, and they occur much later,  and they tend to be bank specific.  the overall benchmark rate,  while it might end up being slightly lower in its reporting than the reality was,  if anything, will understate the effects that we will discuss today.  so the first component is the libor, which is an unsecured rate.  as in, bank x gives money to bank y, and if bank y can't pay,  bank x can just go after bank y through some kind of liquidation or  bankruptcy procedure but has no actual collateral behind it.  the ois is going, in contrast,  to be something that is very close to being a secured borrowing rate.  ois stands for overnight index swap, and this is a relatively  straightforward financial derivative, which just enables the users  of it to swap fixed and floating interest rate obligations.  the ois rate is generally considered to be a good proxy for  a risk-free interest rate.  so if you want to know,  what's the risk free interest rate over some time period like one month or  three months, market participants will frequently look to the ois.  another thing that is sometimes used as this proxy is the actual  yield on government bonds.  so you use u.s. government bonds or u.s.  government bills, for example, for the risk-free rate.  this is actually somewhat problematic because as we now know, in a crisis,  people run to government securities, and  they actually do even better than what you might think a risk-free rate would do.  there is a flight to the safety,  there is a flight to the liquidity that we see in government debt.  so we're not going to use that.  instead, we will use the ois.  the details are less important than just the basic idea,  this is something that is a risk-free rate, or a proxy for a risk-free rate.  when we look at the difference between the libor and the ois, we have a measure for  the riskiness of banks' unsecured borrowing.  if the ois is like a secured risk-free rate, and  the libor is an unsecured rate that banks have to pay,  then the difference between those two things will reflect how risky we think,  as market participants, it is to lend to banks.  historically, this spread is very small.  because historically, there's not much of a concern that a bank will not be able to  pay back its debts over time horizons like overnight, one month, or three months.  and we would see this being below ten basis points.  during the anxiety period of the crisis, this jumps up and during the panic period  that followed lehman's fall, it spikes up to an enormous level.  we will turn to that in the next lesson.  [music] 
[music]  all right, so where are we?  historically, we would use precious metals for our safe assets.  there's only so much gold in the ground.  can't be carrying gold around, it's the only way you can transact.  we can use the debt and currency of stable countries.  what we've seen is by 2007, we're running out of us securities for this purpose.  insured deposits in commercial banks are another solution.  there's not enough supply of them in the united states either.  what the financial system is good at, is when there is excess demand for  some specific type of financial instrument.  in this case safe assets.  you can expect the financial system to try to manufacture it.  that's what it's been doing since the beginning of the financial system.  that's what bank notes were, in the early 19th century in the united states.  that's what demand deposits became in the second half of the 19th century.  and that's what effectively the shadow banking types of activities that we saw in  the 21st century are.  what does it mean to manufacture safe assets?  the key principle is that you take an asset and  you use only part of it as collateral.  so for example, my house would not count as a safe asset under any definition.  nobody would be willing to accept from me, or from any financial intermediary that  helped me do it, a even fractional share of my house as the payment for something.  if someone came to you and said, here's 1% of my house.  here's a certificate that's worth 1% of my house.  i'm going to use that as currency.  the estimated value of my house is $300,000.  so, here's $3,000 of something that you'll use as currency.  you would never do that.  you would think, how can i possibly accept 1% of your house as payment?  i would have to go and figure out what your house is worth.  plus, i don't even know if i could even sell your house if i needed to sell it.  there's certainly risk that's involved in that.  so instead, what ultimately can happen is,  i say all right, you're not gonna have just 1% of my house, how about this?  you have the first $3,000 of the value of my house.  the other 99% of my house, that's my problem.  but you would get the last, that's your collateral.  your collateral is, if this loan doesn't get paid back,  you get the very first $3,000.  the most senior part of the loan.  and that's how banks work it.  so even when a bank that forces you to take a mortgage,  what are they going to do?  they're going to say, please put 20% down, less sometimes, but  these days often 20% down.  and then we will take the next 80%.  and that's how the bank tries to make sure that things are safe.  and that's basically the same strategy that we're going to use when we  manufacture any safe asset.  we're gonna take a bundle of things that, by themselves might not be safe.  and then we're going to just take the most senior part of it, and  try to use that as the creation of a safe asset.  so our example of a house is very clear.  you purchase a house, say for $1 million, this would be a more expensive house.  how safe would the first $1,000 loan on this property be?  how much work would you need to do to figure it out?  not very much.  similarly, think about how a company could do this?  a large company has say a market capitalization of $100 billion,  all equity, zero debt.  now this company is going to go and issue $1 million of debt, and that's it.  now this company is not a ponzy scheme, this company has products,  this company has profits.  that first million dollar of debt is going to be super safe.  it's going to be so super safe that once it went through the normal securities  process, we wouldn't really have to spend any time on it at all,  to know that this is something that is effectively triple a.  the key here is to set the debt to value ratio low enough so  that nobody has an incentive to analyze the fault probabilities.  that's what information insensitivity means.  i'm going to issue something, $1 million of debt or  $1,000 loan on a $1 million property.  and with that, the other side, the counterparty says, it's kinda pointless.  i'm not gonna go and spend hours and  hours trying to figure out if this is actually going to pay off, right.  and i know that the other side won't do that either.  this can now act as a form of collateral,  as a safe asset in many types of transactions.  [music] 
[music]  the next link in the panic chain came from money market mutual funds.  many market commentators, including very sophisticated ones.  over the weekend before lehmann's bankruptcy believed,  it had been six months since bear stearns bankruptcy, or  bear stearns near bankruptcy and rescue by by jp morgan.  the markets have had a lot of time to figure out how they would be able to  handle the bankruptcy of an institution like lehman brothers.  there was a certain amount of confidence, in some places bordering on hubris,  that we understood all of these deep, complex connections that  lehman brothers would have with the rest of financial markets.  one place that was missed, one very important connection that was missed  was lehman brothers connection with money market mutual fund.  money market mutual funds are a specific kind of investment company.  we discussed them as one important part of the shadow banking system in an earlier  lesson of this module.  they're only permitted to own a narrow range of securities.  so far more restrictive than what a bank can do with their deposits.  money market mutual funds can only own short term highly rated securities.  and in return for accepting that narrow investment range in  their mandate from the sec, which is their regulator.  they have the right at this time to report stable values for their share prices.  this is to say that if their portfolio was actually worth 99.8 cents on the dollar.  they were still allowed to report that it was worth 100 cents on the dollar, and  to tell their investors that their dollar was still worth a dollar.  on september 16, 2008, reserve primary fund, a very large and  longstanding money market mutual fund and, broke the buck.  and they broke the buck meaning that their value of their portfolio fell below  what they were allowed to round up to 100 cents on the dollar.  which in this case was 99.5 cents.  it fell below that.  they were no longer allowed to round up.  and the parent entity of this fund was unable to hand enough money over to  the fund so that it would actually be able to round up.  they then had to report a value for  their fund to their shareholders which was less than a dollar.  this is called breaking the buck.  this was due almost entirely to their exposure to lehmann brothers commercial  paper.  they had lent money to lehman brothers and  in the day following lehman brothers failure.  the value of that commercial paper plummeted,  they're forced to mark that plummeting value to market on their report back to  shareholders of their net asset value and now they're no longer worth a dollar.  now when people put their more money or  more importantly when institutions put their money in money market mutual funds.  they don't want to think about it.  these are the classic type of safe assets,  assets that are supposed to be information insensitive.  not only am i giving you the money and expecting it to be safe but i have no  staff available to go and analyze whether or not my money actually is safe.  just like when we give our money to the bank we're expecting,  in a deposit to get our money back.  people who give money and institutions who gives money in money market mutual  funds are expecting to get their money back.  the first thing that happened as soon as the reserve primary fund broke the book is  that there was a run.  and there was a run on all of the funds that were similar to reserve primary.  and it was a run predominantly driven at this time by institutional investors.  that run led quickly to panic on the part of all market commentators and  to regulators coming in with a guarantee,  on a whole lot of the long standing assets in money market mutual funds.  now, we should've seen this coming.  and we should've seen this coming because in august of 2007 when we first had  runs on asset backed commercial paper,  which money market mutual funds are also large investors in.  many money market mutual funds were in trouble and would have broken the buck  unless they had received support from their parent entities.  so a large mutual fund complex,  if they see that one of their funds is falling below $1 a share is entitled to  transfer money in from their central coffers in order to shore up that fund.  they later reported that they did that exact thing.  that was reported in sec filings.  but rather than make people nervous about money market mutual funds,  it seemed to reinforce people's belief that these really were very safe.  since after all the parents will stand behind them.  this is purely private form of bailout, you could call it.  but if you think that a money market mutual fund is too big to fail within  a mutual fund complex, you're gonna feel very safe with your money in it.  even if there is some kind of a hit.  in december of 2008, the hit was too large, and the institutions that  would've been able to support their funds earlier were unable to do so.  thus, the run.  an important paper by patrick mccabe of the federal reserve showed  that during this initial stepping up of support in 2007,  during the run on asset-backed commercial paper.  the assets under management at money market mutual funds actually grew,  because people believed that these implicit promises of sponsors would really  help them.  the 43 money market mutual funds that were bailed out by their sponsors.  when that news came out,  helped rather than hindered the money market mutual fund industry.  in september 2008, this was not possible.  and we can see this in the following picture.  this is taken from mccabe's paper.  on the y-axis are assets  under management in money market mutual funds by investment objective.  there are three types of money market mutual funds.  prime, which is the type that reserved primary was, and  the place where we have the majority of assets.  prime funds are allowed to invest in any security that is  highly rated in short term.  they're not restricted to government securities or to tax exempt securities.  the other two categories on this list do have such restrictions  the blue dotted line are government only money market mutual funds and  the green line at the bottom are tax exempt money market mutual funds.  now we can see this large rise going back to the late 1990's.  the total market was just over one trillion dollars for  assets under management.  by the time we reach the eve of the crisis in 2008,  if we add all of these different categories together.  we are up around four trillion dollars in assets for the money market mutual fund.  compare that, for example, to the assets held overall in deposits by banks,  which was at this time approximately 10 trillion.  and you can see that money market mutual funds are a huge player.  they're really on the same order of magnitude that the entire banking system  is in terms of taking on and making promises about safe assets.  now at the start of the asset backed commercial paper crisis in august of 2007,  that's the vertical line that you see right there in 2007.  we see that following that, there's an increase in the assets  to both the prime money market mutual funds, the black line.  and the government-only funds, the dotted blue line.  there's an influx into money market mutual funds at this time.  why?  well, many investors had previously kept their money  in asset-backed commercial paper.  when they no longer were putting in asset-backed commercial paper,  a very nice substitute for that is money market mutual funds.  they went both to government funds, the blue dotted line,  and to the prime funds that had shown the ability to survive the asset-backed  commercial paper run, in many cases with support from their sponsors.  now what happens however, when some of the money from asset-backed commercial paper,  some of it goes to prime funds.  but some of it now goes to the government funds.  ultimately, government securities have been purchased and what has been sold  is the ultimate paper at the end of asset back commercial paper, which are things  that support student loans and credit cards and auto loans and mortgages.  so we have transferred some holdings to government away from that.  that's a bit of a strain on the real economy,  a strain that will continue to hold over the subsequent year.  in september 2008, at the lehmann bankruptcy, which is the second  vertical line that you can see in this figure, we see the effects of the run.  following september 15th, we have on the oder of $400 billion dollars,  falling away from prime money market mutual funds.  almost all of it, flowing into government money market mutual funds.  the drop in the black line is  more than completely offset by the rise in the blue line.  government securities at this point are a safe haven.  everybody wants to own them, or  wants to own money market mutual funds that can buy them.  this drop off was only stopped  by a government guarantee that came within days of lehman's failure.  in the absence of that, you can do your own extrapolation of this line and  where it would have gone.  [music] 
[music]  let's summarize what we discussed in this module.  first, the problems in subprime were clear to all market participants by early 2007.  they can see it, there's an actual market price of the abx index that  enables everybody to see that there are problems.  nevertheless, these problems were not expected to infect  the whole financial system.  ben bernanke was very much in the majority when he gave his speech in may of 2007,  saying that these problems in subprime would be contained.  but, as it turned out, uncertainly about the location of risks lead to a spread of  anxiety beginning in the middle of 2007.  and then accelerating after the bnp paribas event of august 9th, and  the subsequent runs on asset-backed commercial paper.  people just didn't know exactly where these risks were, and  when they didn't know where the risks were and they were really expecting to be in  safe assets, the simplest thing to do was to exit them.  essentially the financial system is ill-equipped to  analyze risks in seemingly safe assets.  just as individuals are ill-equipped to analyze whether or  not their bank is solvent to handle their deposits or whether or  not an e.coli infection should keep you from eating hamburgers.  we don't do that analysis, we just do the simple information processing  event of avoiding something that used to be safe and now might not be.  what this gives us is, the stage is set for a good, old fashion bank run.  but now instead of the bank run happening in this traditional bank which  had the mortgages on their balance sheet and  nice simple demand deposits, it's taking place in shadow banking markets.  in the next module, we will discus several case studies of where  the shadow banking markets collapsed in a chain reaction from this type of anxiety.  [music] 
[music]  >> we've now spent the last few modules going piece by piece through  some pressures that existed during the anxiety and  then panic phase of the financial crisis.  this is a good time summarize what those different pressures are, and  then to note that actually these are relatively new things.  they're new relatively to financial crises we've seen in the past.  and to understand perhaps why they took so  many market participants and government regulators by surprise.  the first was just rising spreads and runs on unsecured debt.  so that's the asset backed commercial paper, and  then later the money market mutual funds that we see having runs starting in 2007.  the second is  fire sales of assets that we're going to have to have in liquidation.  so, as the institutions that held on to asset-backed  securities start to fail or be under pressure because they can no longer borrow  the same way they could before, they need to sell these things.  if they can't borrow on them, they need to sell them.  and when they sell them, like the fire sales that we see in any industry,  there's going to be pressure on those values.  and then, of course,  those assets are being held by other institutions that thought they were safe.  these types of fire sales create uncertainty about the values on  everybody's balance sheets.  so, if you have an institution that doesn't actually have, for example,  any sub-prime securities on its balance sheet, but there are other institutions  that hold the non sub-prime securities of that original institution and  are selling them because they need to get money from somewhere,  then that puts pressure on that second institution.  think of what would happen, for example, if your neighbor ran into financial  trouble and was forced to sell all of the objects that were in their house.  this would probably be not so good for  those same objects if they were in your house.  even though that was not the reason they were in trouble in the first place.  all of this together meant that the only way things could be financed in many cases  was with a secured lending transaction that's called repo.  and, specifically, what we saw evidence for  was that in the bilateral repo market where there's transactions going in  between just two counter parties the haircuts which are the discounts  relative to the collateral that is being used for the loan were increasing rapidly.  that effectively plays the same role as deposits just being taken out of the bank.  in the tri-party form of repo where there's a clearing  bank that stands in between those two counter parties, that clearing bank,  which during the crisis was predominately either done by jp morgan or by the bank of  new york, clearing bank realizes that they have an awful lot of exposure.  if the borrowing counter party goes bankrupt sometime in the middle of the day  the clearing bank is left holding the bag.  what that means is that the clearing bank starts to demand a lot more collateral,  collateral in the form of cash that the borrowers simply don't have.  finally, what we see particularly in the case of aig,  is that when you are a large player in financial markets and  you've given insurance all over the markets, and suddenly people start getting  worried that you're not actually gonna be able to pay off on all of that insurance,  worried perhaps because your credit rating has just been downgraded, then  all of your counter parties at once will come to you and demand more collateral.  and they may be contractually allowed to demand more collateral.  again, this is simply collateral that you don't have.  and at a time when short term funding markets have completely frozen,  you have no way to go and get it.  so we have a complicated situation where  there may be solvency problems at some of these institutions.  we can't tell for sure, but the liquidity problems,  the inability to come up with the extra collateral,  the inability to roll over loans, overwhelms any question about solvency and  leads to a chain reaction where the institutions one by one will fail.  these mechanisms that are just listed here are new.  they're new as of the crisis of 2007 and 2008.  leading up to this time, the experience that regulators and  economists had with financial crises were either the old-fashioned types  of bank runs that we saw in money centers like new york and london that  happened for centuries, but really had not happened since the great depression.  or, they were linked crises between sovereign debt and  the banking system that happened in emerging market countries, and  happened quite frequently throughout the 70s, 80s, and 90s.  but what we had not seen was  something that looked like a good old fashioned bank run, but  happening in the shadow banking system instead of the traditional banking system.  and as it turns out, the tools that were available to  policy makers to fight that kind of a run, were very, very lacking.  and the understanding that market participants and policy makers had of what  those mechanics were, and how we could try to fix them, was also very weak.  however, policy makers did try their best.  and we will hear in the next lecture from secretary geithner about  the different tools that were developed during the crisis and  the different ideas that people had to come up with on the fly and  test as quickly as possible to try to fight this panic.  [music] 
[music]  we can't understand what happened in the housing crisis without getting a little  deeper into understanding mortgages,  the loans that are made so that people can buy houses.  these loans, of course, when bundled together into securitized bonds, played  a very large role in what eventually happened in the financial crisis.  but, first the underlying mortgages themselves.  in the united states,  the standard mortgage has a 30 year term, fixed interest rates.  so, every year, you pay interest on that loan, plus a tiny amortization.  so if you have a 5% mortgage on a $300,000 mortgage,  paying 5% fixed interest rate, you will pay every year in interest 5%  of whatever the remaining principal is on the loan, plus some principal.  so in the early years of the loan, in the very first year of the loan,  you would need to pay $15,000 in interest.  plus you might pay about $3,000 off of the principal.  so in total, you'd pay about $18,000.  and if you keep paying $18,000 every year,  eventually you will pay off all of the loan.  and that takes 30 years.  now, there are alternative structures.  and these alternative structures grew in popularity in the united states.  they've always been popular in other countries, relatively more popular.  the most common alternative is an adjustable rate mortgage.  an arm, or just pronounced arm or arms for the plural.  an adjustable rate mortgage will be adjustable for some portion of the term.  so it could be adjustable right from the beginning.  so your interest rate will be pegged to some other interest rate that's in  the market.  most commonly the london interbank offered rate, the libor.  and you'll pay some amount relative to that.  so that can start in the very first year.  so as short term interest rates move around,  your payment would move around as well.  more common though is to have a rate that's fixed for  some portion of the loan and then begins to float.  by doing that, you will get a lower rate in the early years of the loan, but  you're taking some risk that the rate will increase in the later years of the loan.  so for example, a 5/25, sometimes just called 5/1, so 5/25  would mean it's fixed for five years, and then floating or adjustable for 25 years.  the other way of saying saying it is 5/1 which is it's fixed for five years, and  then it adjusts every one year after that.  so let's say that same loan that you could have taken out for  5% fixed rate on your $300,000 mortgage, you could get for  perhaps 3.5% fixed rate for the first five years.  but then after five years, it will adjust.  now this could be a good loan for you, especially if you're expecting there's no  way you're gonna stay in your house for past five years.  if you know for sure you're gonna be selling your house sometime in the next  five years, why pay a higher interest rate in the first five years under a fixed rate  when you don't need all of that safety over the last 25 years of the loan?  5/25, that's a very common type of loan, but so are 2/28,  3/27, 7/23, which in each case would mean fixed for two years for  the 2/28, fixed for three years for the 3/27, or for seven for the 7/23.  in those cases, you just get a shorter or  a longer amount of time before the loan begins to adjust.  now sometimes, we will lower the fixed rate below even what the market  might want us to do, for five years.  so it could be that to borrow over 30 years, you would have to pay 5%.  to borrow over five years, you would have to pay 3.5%.  but to make it even more appealing to a potential buyer,  we give you a very low rate over the first five years.  not three and a half percent, but let's say two and a half percent, even lower.  now why would we be able to do that?  we would do that if when you refinance the loan, if you choose to  refinance the loan after five years, you have to pay us a little bit of a penalty.  or, if after five years, when you refinance, the rate that you'll have to  pay relative to whatever the reference rate is, has a bigger spread.  so for example in the three and a half percent case for a five 5/25 mortgage,  you might then pay let's say 100 basis points which is 1% over the libor rate.  if i give you a teaser rate, perhaps you have to pay 200 basis points  above the libor rate when there is an adjustment.  which of course,  then gives you a pretty big incentive to refinance your loan after five years.  but if you have to pay me a small penalty to do that,  i'm getting some of the money back later.  so that would be one way that we can fool around with  a teaser rate on an adjustable rate mortgage.  alternative structures such as this are quite popular outside of  the united states, and grew in popularity in the united states.  you can get even more flexible structures.  instead of just saying the fixed rate mortgage,  where it's the same payment every year.  or an adjustable rate mortgage, where you would make the same payment for  the first x years of the mortgage, and then you would adjust thereafter.  you can add in extra things.  for example, negative amortization loans.  enable you in the early years of the mortgage, instead of paying off small  piece of the mortgage, to actually be increasing the size of the mortgage.  so, your payment is much lower in the first few years.  this is similar to a teaser rate.  what the lender would get in return is either the ability to charge you more in  the later years of the mortgage, or to get some payment made to them,  if you refinance before you have to make those larger payments.  similarly, instead of paying a small amortization every year,  another way to keep your payments down is with a big balloon payment.  a large payment after some part of the loan.  so instead of paying off, say,  approximately 1% of the principal every year for the first five years,  you might make one payment of 5% of the principal after 5 years.  all of these things, all of these extra little tweaks are ways that lenders and  borrows often try to have a contract such that the payments  are lower in the early years and higher in the later years.  we'll talk a lot more today about why that might be an optimal thing to do in some  instances.  [music] 
[music]  all right, if we have prime mortgages, the other type of mortgage must be nonprime.  they're nonprime, and they fall into a bunch of different categories.  there's two categories that you'll hear a lot about  when people discuss the financial crisis.  the first is subprime, and  here unfortunately, there's not a perfect definition.  so let me give you one that is useful.  and this is in quotes cuz it's taken directly from a paper by mayer,  pence and sherlund.  although categories are not rigidly defined, subprime loans are generally  targeted to borrowers who have tarnished credit histories and  little savings available for down payments.  now you can be missing any of the earlier categories that will make something  conforming other than the size of the loan.  typically though it's credit score or  it's income that will be less than what's necessary for a conforming loan.  so subprime loans are just going to be by their nature even in the absence of  any government guarantee one way or the other they're going to be riskier.  they're going to be riskier because the underlying borrower has less of a credit  history and has less room to be able to make their payment.  so we're gonna expect them to be a little bit riskier, but at the same time,  the government can't be involved in actually guaranteeing them.  so even if they were just the same level of riskiness, as a prime loan,  they would lack a government guarantee.  another term that you will hear, which is unfortunately even less precisely defined,  is near-prime, or the term of art has grown up to be alt-a.  so you hear it called alt-a and  from that same source, here's what we would call an alt-a loan.  near-prime mortgages are made to borrowers with more minor  credit quality issuers or borrowers who are unable or  unwilling to provide full documentation of assets or income.  so in some cases, the most common example you'll hear of this  are small business owners who perhaps  can't give you a w2 the same way that an employee can to demonstrate their income.  the bank might view them as being really quite a safe borrower,  similar to other prime borrowers, but  because they're unable to produce the documentation necessary to  get a conforming loan, they're still going to be considered nonconforming.  i'll go by the terms nearprime or this term of art in the market of alt-a.  together we're gonna lump sub prime and  alt a into a category that we're going to call nonprime.  nonprime mortgages, they're not new products around for  a while, but they exploded in the 2000's.  here's a picture.  you see that the line is giving the subprime share of the entire market and  that's labeled along the line.  so in 1996 the subprime share of the market,  this is just subprime, it does not include alt-a.  the subprime share of the market was 9.5% and it stayed relatively steady  even dipping slightly over the next seven years before starting to grow rapidly.  and in the period from 2003 to 2006,  we see it grow from 8.3% of the market to 23.5% of the market.  and this is a time where the market itself is growing rapidly.  so the total amount in dollars of subprime loans, that's the height of the bars.  and the height of those bars show that the total amount was  below $100 million dollars a year, 1996 and 1997.  growing to about $200 billion in 2002, and then really exploding,  reaching the peak above $600 billion in 2005,  before falling off dramatically in 2007 and 2008.  those bars are split into two different groups.  and this is something that we will talk more about in future modules,  which is the difference between securitized and non-securitized loans.  the most important thing to note here is that the majority of the growth  from 2003 to 2007 was in securitized subprime loans.  the subprime loans would be made by the banks and then bundled into securities and  sold to investors.  it was an enormous growth, and it plays a large role both in popular narratives and  in the reality of what went in the lead up to the financial crisis.  [music] 
[music]  we can think of what happened at northern rock in the summer of 2007 as a microcosm  of the overall global financial crisis.  the bank grew significantly in the years before the crisis.  and the main liability growth was coming from wholesale and  nontraditional deposit sources.  just like when we look at the overall global financial crisis.  we notice that it is shadow banking,  it is nontraditional banking where we had this enormous amount of growth.  the same thing really shows at northern rock.  here's a picture that illustrates the gap between their traditional  funding source of retail deposits and the total amount of their balance  sheet that they needed to finance in the years from 1998 to 2007.  the bottom section of this picture is the retail deposits and  the retail deposits we can see grew.  at a mild rate.  from june 1998 through june 2007.  but overall the balance sheet was growing at the speed of the very top line.  so adding all of these different things together.  on the y-axis is the billions of pounds for total that needed to be financed.  and that's a level that starts below 20 billion pounds in june 1998 and  goes all the way to be about 113 billion pounds at the peak in 2007.  so how do we fill this gap other than retail deposits?  the first section above retail deposits is securitized notes.  now this sounds like securitization so it sounds scary and it sounds like the type  of securitization that perhaps got us in trouble in the united states.  but in fact, here it's actually quite different.  the securitized notes that were offered by northern rock were more akin to asset back  commercial paper in the united states, which we studies in the previous module.  except for the fact that it did not engage in a lot of maturity transformation.  most of the borrowing of these securitized notes  was done at a time scale greater than one year.  so the way the securitized notes would work is that northern rock would grab  a bunch of the assets off of their balance sheet.  in the united states,  a securitization would move it completely off of your balance sheet.  it's not the way it would work here, they would just set up a little spot on their  balance sheet where the assets would be sequestered by themselves,  and then they would issue notes on those assets.  and those notes would have either medium-term or long-term maturities.  so in fact, as we'll see in a later lesson today, there wasn't really  a run on these securitized notes, but nevertheless, this is wholesale funding.  other liabilities is the category just above securitized notes, and  that's really where we're gonna see the largest problem.  and this is not broken up all that carefully in northern rock's  official filings.  but largely from what we know from a variety of sources,  this was wholesale funding of many different types.  sometimes it was just a very specific financing  organized with a large institutional investor, or sovereign wealth fund.  sometimes it would be notes that were shorter term notes,  like commercial paper issued by northern rock.  or just deposits that are coming from large depositors, not retail depositors.  finally at the top is a very thin sliver of equity.  this is typical of banks and  typical of financial institutions in how highly levered they are,  although certainly northern rock's leverage was very high at this time.  now, as we discussed earlier, the very first run came in wholesale funding.  and the public, that everybody saw retail deposit run, came later.  here's a picture of the overall amount of difference before and after the crisis.  and, this comes from northern rock's annual report for 2007.  on the left side, shows the sources of their liabilities before the run,  so this is june 2007.  it is over the summer of 2007 that we see a wholesale run.  and then in the fall of 2007 that we see a retail run.  the bottom of these pictures are relatively similar.  at the very bottom is securitized notes.  not a whole lot of difference in the amount of securitized notes between june  2007 and december 2007.  and that's primarily because these are fairly long maturity notes.  there's no opportunity to run.  just above secure ties notes are covered bonds.  covered bonds are another somewhat distinct kind of financing that we  see in europe and not in the united states.  and here again, you can think of them as being something akin to securitization.  there's a dedicated pool of assets that are,  it's very much like a secured loan with a bit more protections for the borrower.  but once again, these bonds have a fairly long maturity.  and in fact, the total amount of financing they receiving from covered bonds  increased in the six months from june to december 2007.  the big changes we see are at the top.  and in june of 2007 we have about 50 billion,  51 billion pounds that are coming from either retail deposits or  some form of wholesale financing.  that falls down to be about 22 billion.  so falling more by more than half or by 29 billion pounds in december of 2007.  replaced- almost completely by a loan from the bank of england.  so it was in fact the wholesale which drops from 26.7 to 11.4 and the retail  which drops from 24.3 to 10.5 over this time period that needed to be replaced.  now the retail bonds, the retail financing that disappeared,  which as we said earlier came a bit later than the wholesale financing,  was not coming from traditional retail sources.  it was instead of the branch deposits that they began with, and  here's a picture to illustrate it, coming from other types of retail accounts.  again, let's compare december 2006 now with december 2007 and  see where the drops were.  looking first at the bottom, the traditional branch accounts,  they fell from 5.5 billion pounds.  to just over 3 billion pounds with most of that drop coming  right around the time of the announcement in september of 2007.  but the really very largest drop-offs are coming from the top two categories.  the top category of postal accounts, and  the next category of off shore and other accounts.  postal accounts are, as you might expect, where you don't get to go to an atm,  you live far from an atm, somewhere else in the uk or  somewhere else in europe, and you have to do your banking by post.  now why would we end up here at northern rock.  looking at such a large amount of postal accounts in december 2006.  well, to attract people to these types of accounts, which has less  convenience than the ones where you can just take your money out of an atm.  we have to offer a higher rate.  the same goes for the internet and  telephone accounts that we see two steps below that.  for these types of accounts,  we would expect the depositors to be very sensitive to the interest rate.  they have no particular brand loyalty to northern rock.  they don't go to the local atm or to the local branch.  they're just shopping around, often on the internet, to try to find the best rates.  so if a bank that doesn't have any kind of loyalty and  is just trying to sell on the highest rates, runs into some trouble.  we would expect to see the run happen there fasted and strongest and  that is indeed what we see.  the offshore and other accounts are of much the same category here we would be  perhaps outside completely of the eu and  we might be getting investments from very large investors.  once again, these are gonna be the types of investors that we would expect to be  very, very sensitive to trouble and to be very, very sensitive to interest rates.  [music] 
[music]  our first case study is northern rock.  northern rock began in the 19th century as mutually  owned building society with a business focused on serving it's local community,  which is in the northeast of england.  the bank went public in 1997,  and grew at an annual rate of over 20% for the next 10 years.  with total assets of 113.5 billion pounds,  making it the 5th largest uk bank by mortgage assets as of june, 2007.  northern rock focused on prime lending, so not subprime,  had minimal subprime exposure.  and the uk housing market actually remained strong through the summer of  2007, unlike the united states market which had already shown signs of weakness,  particularly on the subprime side.  but the rapid growth that northern rock had,  beginning when it went public in 1997, had outstripped it's traditional deposit pace.  so the bank had to rely on nontraditional funding sources.  typically, what a bank is doing is it's taking deposits old style bank.  especially, an old style building society or savings and  loans in the united states is just taking deposits, saving deposits, and  putting them largely into mortgage assets, into housing.  but as northern rock grew very, very fast, its deposit base which is still  limited for the most part, where it had its largest brand value in the northeast  of england, is insufficient to support all of the investments that they're making.  so they're gonna have to go and  get assets from somewhere else, funds from somewhere else and the funds they're  getting from somewhere else are largely wholesale funds and they're quicker money.  they're not like the depositors who live right next to a branch  who might feel loyalty to a bank.  over the summer of 2007, some of these nontraditional funding sources began to  dry up and efforts to organize a private rescue for the bank failed.  what we see is, we have a gap between what our investments are, and  what our deposit base can handle.  we have a drying up of the other wholesale funding sources, and now we're trying to  have some sort of private rescue but we're unable to do that.  now we're gonna have some words leak out, some information leak out about  this attempt of a private rescue, in fact, on september 13th, 2007.  now we're not in lehman territory yet,  we're a full year before lehman brothers failure in the united states.  the bbc broke news that northern rock had sought assistance from  the bank of england.  the bank of england granted that assistance the next morning.  at this point, whether or not they had decided to do it the day before,  they would have had no choice by the next morning but  the run on retail branch deposits began that day.  once it became public that northern rock was going to get assistance from the bank  of england, now people started going to the bank.  individuals, not just wholesale funding, which had been drying up in the summer but  in fact, the retail funding.  now this can happen in the uk must more at this time than it can happen in  the united states because full deposit insurance for  accounts in the uk was capped at 2,000 pounds.  compare that will $100,000 in the united states and  at this point, maybe 2,000 pounds is approximately $3,000.  so, it's a much lower 100% cap.  and then there's 90% coverage up to 35,000 pounds but  90% coverage is really not going to make you feel very safe.  you certainly don't want to lose 10% of the value of your account.  it's much better to just go and run to the bank.  despite the fact that this was very public and  worldwide we saw pictures of retail customers standing outside banks outside  of northern rock, wasn't really the retail branch run that made a difference.  it was the wholesale run, and  one way to think of the puzzle of northern rock which is very much a microcosm of  the whole global financial crisis is with this quote.  this comes from a paper by hyun shin who was at the time an economist  at princeton university who wrote a very important article  summarizing what happened in northern rock.  we'll be looking, in this module, at some of the evidence that he brought forth.  here's what he had to say, the real question raised by the northern rock  episode is not so much why retail depositors are so  prone to loss of confidence that lead to bank runs, but instead why sophisticated  lenders who operate in capital markets chose suddenly to deny lending to a bank  that had an apparently solid asset book and virtually no subprime lending.  that's one way to think about the whole global financial crisis writ large.  even where there was limited subprime exposure,  there was a run by wholesale lenders and we will max, in the next few lessons,  examine exactly what happened at northern rock.  [music] 
[music]  as we walk through the phases of our response to the crisis the basic choices  we make, we want to start by thinking about the basic framework of polices  that governs the central banks typically have available.  and the full framework of tools that ultimately you need to deploy, if you  wanna be effective in confronting a major financial crisis, a major financial panic.  so the first of these is about fiscal policy.  these are things like tax cuts and  unemployment benefits, direct spending to help offset the collapse and demand.  and as you think about what we did, remember that the stimulus to be effective  has to be large relative to the contraction of private demand that comes  with the financial crisis, and it needs to be quick and it needs to be sustained.  the second is about the classic instruments of monetary policy.  the things central banks do to lower interest rates  in the face of a fall and a decline in demand.  so that the key thing to think about is,  is to get interest rates negative in real terms.  and to keep them there for as long as you need,  to facilitate the the deleveraging that has to happen after a financial crisis.  again it'll help lay the foundation for growth to come back.  in the third framework of tools is about  how you deal with the weakness in the financial system.  how you use the classic lender of last resort tools of liquidity for banks and  other institutions.  how you think about broader guarantees that provide greater protection  to people who you want to be investing and lending money to the financial system.  how you provide support for funding markets that aren't banks or non-banks.  things like commercial paper or the asset backed securities market.  how you think about providing capital to institutions who need more capital.  and of course how you think about allowing institutions to fail in ways that don't  contaminate, or don't add to the instability across the rest of the system.  phase one where we let the crisis burn.  this began roughly in the summer of '07.  and i stop at in the early part of march, late february of '08.  so here's a quick little tour summary of the major policy actions  taken as the crisis evolved.  and here's a picture of what a few dimensions of the finances and  economy looked like as we were making those choices.  so you can see house prices peaked 18 months or so earlier i think, and you  can see in that first phase of the crisis they begin this slightly steeper decline.  the price of mortgage backed securities, which you can say the securities most  sensitive to the risk of losses in house prices,  the risk of default by home owners.  you can see those start to fall very sharply in that earlier period of time.  they're falling in part again because the weaker parts of the system  are experiencing the classic beginnings of runs.  finance withdraw, and they're selling those assets in response to that.  and that produces this risk of self-reinforcing fire-sale.  this is a chart of job losses.  you can see that the economy is not showing much sign of distress yet.  the economy is still creating jobs early part of this period of time,  it's only the later part of this period,  early part of '09 that things start to deteriorate in terms of job losses.  and the economy itself is growing through part of this period of time.  we deployed the standard monetary policy tools available to central banks.  we lowered interest rates aggressively, much more aggressively than  other countries caught up in this early stage of crisis.  we tried to get liquidity into the banking system, by reducing the discount rate and  the stigma associated with borrowing from the federal reserve.  we deployed swap lines for foreign central banks.  and secretary paulson and president bush went to congress to get authority for  a modest tax rebate to provide some fiscal support to what  they appropriately saw at the time was a weakening economy.  but we didn't lend beyond the banking system.  we didn't extend those classic tools  to other parts of the system that were caught up in this initial distress.  we didn't step in to support the other funding markets that were so  critical to the function of the american economy.  we allowed fair amount of failure, weaker institutions to fail across the system.  more than two dozen mortgage lenders failed in this period of time,  including new century, a pretty large substantial mortgage lender.  so again, just to show it again, you can see that in this  period we mostly let the fires burn, and we mostly relied on  the conventional arsenal of tools available to central banks.  here's a chart of what happened to the fed fund rate, which you can see we lowered  gradually and then very steeply, early part of '08.  here's a chart that shows one set of the emergency authorities we  ultimately deployed, lending credit facilities, liquidity facilities you  can see in this phase, they're pretty modest at that point.  in this case they're mostly loans through the discount window on our facilities,  mostly to foreign banks.  another way to think about this is that, if you look at the green charts, we mostly  deployed these tools to a relatively limited part of the banking system.  [music] 
[music]  the second section talks about the strategy we adopted in the four phases of  the crisis.  we divided this history into four distinct phases.  the first begins in summer of '07 and continues into early 2008.  the second starts in march 2008, with the actions we took to prevent  the failure of bear stearns, up until the end of the summer, early september.  the third phase is the panic of the fall of '08 and  lasts until the beginning of 2009.  and the last phase deals with the final package of policy measures we put in place  to help arrest the fall in the economy and laid the basis for recovery.  and i'm going to show this in a chart, a series of charts that  depict the s&p, the broad us stock market index.  which is a imperfect proxy for fear, and for the basic feel for  the evolution of the economic crisis and the financial crisis that happened.  you can see on the bottom of this graph, a set of instruments  that were available to the federal reserve and to the us government in the crisis.  these distinguish between support we were able to make to banks,  to other parts of the financial system.  the fiscal authorities we used to help stimulate activity offset the fall in  private demand.  the classic monetary policy tools available to the central bank, and  the tools we had to help reduce the risk that the crisis would  spread around the world.  and, you can see over the course of the crisis that those tools go from inert  to deployed, and they go from red or amber or yellow.  where they're either not being used or  whether they're only there in their conventional form, to when  they're deployed more forcefully, more comprehensively, with more coordination.  and you just can see by looking at this you know how this ends.  that it was only when they were all deployed in full force,  they were able to put a floor under the deteriorating financial system and  economy and get the economy starting to grow again.  okay, i wanna talk about some of the main policy choices we made in the crisis,  the questions we had to confront, the decisions we had to make, and  i list a few of these here.  one is, how far do you let the fires burn?  how much damage do you let happen before you act?  when you decide to act how fast should you escalate?  how do you break a panic, a run that's already started?  how do you conduct the triage you have to conduct in financial crisis?  triage in the sense of how do you decide who to protect, who you let fail.  how broad the arc of failure you allow to happen.  how do you get the financial system working again after a panic like that?  and of course fundamentally, how do you balance the moral hazard risks in acting,  against the economic cost of allowing failure?  important in this kinda is to recognize  that you're doing this in a context of extreme uncertainty.  there's no way to know how bad this could be.  even if you can observe the classic signs of vulnerability to crisis its'  very hard to tell how close you're living to the edge of panic run.  it's hard to know what works, what's gonna get traction.  you can't be sure what mix of things are gonna help reduce the incentive to run and  try to convince people it's safe for them to leave their deposits, for example,  in banks.  and it's safe for banks to start to lend again.  all of us were living at that time with this acute fear of collapse and  this acute fear that the crisis would get away from us,  we wouldn't be able to contain it, wouldn't be able to stabilize things.  and ultimately in that context, you have to decide, you're gonna make mistakes.  you're making decisions quickly in the fog of or were, in the fog of uncertainty.  you have to decide which mistakes do you wanna make.  do you wanna make mistakes being too aggressive or too tentative?  do you wanna make the mistake of creating too much moral hazard or  too little in some sense?  and part of that is a judgment about what mistakes are easier to correct.  which mistakes are harder to correct.  which mistakes that cause more damage.  cuz you face the risk of making mistakes, you're going to have to feel your way.  so i'm gonna go walk back and talk about the history of the decisions we made,  the things we did, what worked what didn't work.  i'm doing that of course with the wisdom of hindsight, but at the time,  and i'll try to describe this,  we were making choices in the face of imperfect knowledge.  not the knowledge, of course, we have today.  [sound] 
[music]  second phase of the crisis beginning in the early part of march 2008 and  coming to the end of the summer in 2008.  here, policy escalates.  you can see from the graph that we start to use a broader range of tools.  more of those bars turn green, indicating a slightly more comprehensive response.  and ill just show what the economy and  the finances will look like as we are doing that.  so the house prices continue their decline although the decline doesnt accelerate.  the price of these financial securities that are sensitive to house prices decline  further, and  that decline accelerates dramatically towards the end of the summer.  we start to lose jobs on a pretty substantial scale.  the economy is moving sideways,  starts to shrink later in the summer in the second quarter.  so what do we do in this period of early escalation?  first and very importantly, we broke the line between banks and  the rest of the system, and  we started to extend these tools of funding liquidity to investment banks.  first time that'd been done since the great depression.  we help facilitate the merger of bernstein's with jp morgan to prevent  the damage caused by the failure of the liquidation of a major institution  in the midst of a very fragile financial system.  the secretary of treasure went to congress to get authority  to help stabilize fannie and freddie, the giant mortgage lenders.  all of this together helps slow the intensity of the burn,  helps slow the intensity of the crisis at least temporarily.  just to repeat again the arc of those policy measures.  you can see that the federal reserve did reduce interest rates but  they were left on hold through much of that period of time.  in part cuz i showed you earlier that the economy was still not showing  the acute stress that was ultimately reflected as the crisis intensified.  we broke this link between banks and non-banks and started lending.  you can see that amount of support the fed was providing started to go up.  we extended the reach of those tools beyond the banking system itself to try to  target more directly the source of weakness in the system.  that's the second phase of escalation.  [music] 
[music]  phase three starts in the early part of september and  continues to the end of '08, beginning of '09.  so you can see in this phase that intensity of policy and  the scope of policy escalates dramatically.  most of the bars turn green, indicating the force of the policy behind it.  a lot of creativity in those interventions,  a lot of things never been done before.  but much more comprehensive in their scope.  price of mortgage backed securities in that context are falling still.  particularly the ones perceived to have less risk.  employment losses intensify dramatically.  the decline in gdp accelerates at the peak the economy was shrinking, we learn later,  at an annual rate of about eight percent a year in real terms at the end of '08.  so what do we do in this context?  so we dramatically expand liquidity into critical markets of the american  financial system.  to the entire system itself, not just institutions like investment banks that  were outside of the protections the banks enjoyed.  but also to critical markets like commercial paper,  asset backed commercial paper.  we provided additional support to key institutions,  including citibank, bank of america and aig.  we provided guarantees to the $3.5 trillion dollar money market industry.  and the entire banking system as a whole.  we injected capital forcibly into institutions that represented about  half the banking system.  we unveiled and put in place, deployed unlimited swap lines to the major central  banks, and pretty substantial swap lines a set of emerging market central banks.  and we provided bridge financing to the automobile industries which were facing  the risk of collapse in the recession.  and i want to illustrate in a visual sense the way this escalation happened.  so you can think about this as a forest,  and a fire starts in part of the forest and you can see the fire start to spread.  and in the early part of the crisis, you can say in the '07 early '08 period,  we draw a pretty thin fire break around the system.  but it's a pretty thin fire break.  and the fire's burning hot enough that the fire jumps the fire break and  starts to burn a broader part of the system.  more of the system's in peril, the fire spreads to the core.  ultimately we escalate draw a broader break around the fire.  and so as the fire spreads, then that core of the system that's so  important to the function of the economy is protected.  so here's another, just a repeat of the scale and  the intensity of those policy measures taken.  so you can see the fed took the fed funds rate effectively to zero.  the fed dramatically expanded the scope and  the level of these liquidity facilities.  you can see they escalate dramatically in dollar  terms to trillions and trillions of dollars.  and the scope of those tools again are extended  to the broader part of the american financial system.  [music] 
>> [music]  >> phase four, the crisis begins in early 2009.  i met with the president the week after he was sworn into office,  and i explained to him that at that point, despite all the things that had  been done in the fall, all the things that caused so much outrage and anger.  the trillions of dollars we'd put into the financial system,  the unprecedented injections of capital into the banking system.  despite all those things, we still had an economy that was collapsing.  and we still had a financial system that was frozen.  and we had five huge financial bombs that were still fundamentally unstable, and  it was gonna take a bunch of additional action, very unpopular action,  to reduce the risk that they collapsed, adding to the damage facing the economy.  those five were aig, fanny and freddy, citi, and b of a.  still.  fragile.  still very unstable.  symptoms of the fact that the system was still fundamentally frozen, and dangerous.  why was the economy still so terrible even after all those actions?  it was probably, because of the lags in impact.  take some time after you do things that have some effect on confidence,  on behavior.  it's probably, because we hadn't used fiscal policy yet, in any meaningful way.  that was the tool left really unaddressed in those first few months of escalation.  but it's also because the strategy we adopted left a lot of uncertainty in  markets amongst investors about how strong was our commitment to protect the system,  and that uncertainty was partly caused by the policy zig zags of the preceding fall.  so, if you just look at the scale of the zig zag in policies,  again i just wanna go through it.  there's a set of places where we acted to prevent failure, and to protect creditors.  that's the list on the left.  and there's a set of institutions where we allowed failure.  and we allowed losses to happen.  why did that matter?  it meant that people who were exposed to risk in financial institutions  couldn't tell, what strategy was guiding our response.  they couldn't tell, what was the perimeter of the fire break.  who was gonna be protected?  how broad would the failures be allowed to happen?  and what that meant is, despite the massive injection of trillions of dollars  of financial support, people couldn't be sure that it was safe to stay.  and they were left still with the incentive to run, or to cut credit lines,  or to stop investing, to prepare for the risk of a broader collapse.  they were not confident about the quality of the money that we put in the window.  so, how did the economy look at that time,  you can see that house price decline continues through late in 08.  the price of those financial securities,  again, now at this point they're sort of moving sideways,  showing some initial traction from the policy interventions we took.  the economy's getting weaker.  still job losses, you know, are at a pace of about  750,000 people in the early part of 09.  and the economy is shrinking in the early part of that thing at an appalling rate.  but things turn relatively, quickly.  >> with that late stage of crisis response.  [music] 
[music]  so let me just highlight what are the most important things we did in this  period of time.  we've finally moved, somewhat late,  to the sort of full powell doctrine of overwhelming force.  massive fiscal stimulus for the first time in the crisis.  there had only been a modest tax rebate in the early part of 08.  the fed continued to deploy and  move to a much more creative frontier in central banking.  we helped facilitate a cooperative  global response to help deploy a much more forceful stimulus around the world.  we put in place a set of stress tests in the american financial system to  help recapitalize it and stabilize it.  we expanded dramatically the scope of our backstops to the funding markets of  the united states.  and we hardened the protections, the guarantees we had  tried to put in place around the american financial system in the fall of 08.  tried, and at that point, until that point had not succeeded.  so the fed, as you've seen, has already put rates to 0.  and at this stage,  it starts what became known as the policy of quantitative easing.  the liquidity facilities were at that peak, and as we start to get traction in  the economy, they start to come down very quickly.  at that point in this last stage of crisis response, we've expanded the scope of  the policies to cover the vast bulk of the core of the american financial system.  and it was the force of that response ultimately,  the addition of the fiscal stimulus, the value of the stress test,  and the broader credibility of the guarantees that ultimately  helped lay the foundation for recovery and traction.  [music] 
[music]  i wanna lay out a set of broader lessons for how you think about  strategy in crisis, and i'm gonna lay out a list of things that  i think offer the most value in how to think about what you do,  how you make decisions, how you make choices confronted with this challenge.  i used to say all the time that plan b is no plan and  you're, you have to have a view on what to do.  you have to be willing to choose and to act.  and what's gonna work and be appropriate was gonna depend on the country, and  the circumstance, the nature of the dynamics.  those will all be a little different, but  you want to have that strategy guided by the set of basic judgments.  and i think we've learned enough from the success and mistakes.  mostly the mistakes of the last century of financial crises that we  have a better basis for knowledge of how to do this.  i'm gonna lay out some views on what i think that basic framework should be.  there's a chinese philosopher's saying, which is very apt,  which is if you want peace, prepare for war.  financial systems are inherently vulnerable to crisis.  the extreme crisis is unimaginable ex ante.  there's no way we know to prevent manias, what can be described as manias.  periods where people are more confident than they should be about the future and  therefore end up lending too much money,  taking on too much risk, borrowing too much relative to what is more prudent.  and there's no way to anticipate, there's no radar for  financial crisis that looks over the horizon that can tell you  when a crisis is looming what's gonna precipitate it?  what's the the spark that's gonna light it?  and therefore for a very limited capacity to preemptive, so  you need to design the system so that it not that it it prevents failure.  this is not a realistic objective.  you have to make it safe for failure.  you have to make it more stable,  more resilient in the face of the inevitable failure,  the inevitable stresses, the inevitable crises you're gonna face and fundamentally  what this means is you have to build a system with stronger shock absorbers.  the stronger foundation against the inevitable.  risk of failure.  so these shock absorbers, you have to design them for the extreme crisis and  you have to apply them to where there's risk that can matter for the system.  and this is about what we call capital leverage liquidity funding pressures  and they have to be applied again to where risk is that could threaten the system.  and there's a very good case as we've adopted in the united states and  around the world to apply a tougher regime for  the large institutions and on the rest of the system.  again, because they can cause more damage when they fail.  and you want them to be forcing their shareholders to be forced to internalize  the externalities caused by that consequence of size.  and to use a very good case for  trying to have thicker cushions across the rest of the system.  margin requirements are one device for doing that.  you have to design these safeguards so that you protect against the inherent risk  that water finds it way, risk finds it way around these constraints, and  ends up just shifting risk outside the net of regulation.  there's a bunch of different ways to do that,  that we're trying to feed our way through the united states.  but fundamentally, what it means is you have to be able to expand the perimeter  of these prudential safeguards to  help limit the risk that people are able to take advantage of and evade them and  build institutions that are fundamentally vulnerable to the risks that banks face,  that could threaten the system without being subject to those protections.  you can require tougher down payment requirements,  force people, try to induce people to hold more equity in their homes against  the inevitable risk of loss of income, or a loss of job, loss of and price declines.  and you wanna have a clear authority and accountability for  the design forceman of these limits.  so what things do you need to have in place,  to help reduce this inherent vulnerability to crisis?  you don't wanna let your banking system grow so large out to the economy.  that you have less ability to protect you from the consequence  of mistakes that people make.  there's a very good case for reducing the risk that your banking system grows to  be two, three, four, five times the size of your economy.  in the us even with investment banks now regulated largely as banks  that system of banks, investment banks is still roughly only one times our economy,  much smaller than most of the financial systems of the major economies,  which is a valuable thing.  you want to limit the ability of banks in particular to borrow in foreign currency.  this is something the u.s. has no need for but is a common dimension, common part  of the crisis many emersion markets faced and was central to many of the pressures  europe faced in this crisis where european banks had borrowed huge amounts of dollars  to finance a huge amount of their lending activity globally, but  their central banks weren't able to provide them dollars in the crisis.  the fed ultimately did that, but that loss of financing in dollars was a big source  of the spread of the crisis around the world and  made the crisis globally much harder to manage.  you need to have the framework of deterrence and  rules enforcement authority in the system so that these protections work.  they don't work without effective deterrence and enforcement.  so think about this as, i say this as supplemental, but  it's critical as a complement to the core protections that i described  before in terms of capital liquidity limitations on the funding risk.  it's very important you maintain a strong framework of resources,  fiscal and others so that you can escalate in the crisis.  if you let your fiscal position erode dramatically, so that, in a crisis,  you can't borrow on your currency at affordable rates,  you've got limited things you can do.  you're gonna consign your citizens to much worse outcomes.  so that importance of maintaining a more prudent,  more powerful framework of physical choices is very important to  the degrees of freedom government has in a crisis.  make sure that you're preparing for the inevitable risks and uncertainty we  face in this world, and part of that is financial capacity you want to maintain.  in part, it's about the firefighting authority.  you want to make sure people are able to deploy quickly in a crisis.  so the critical parts of the firefighting authority are the ones you are able  ultimately able to deploy in our crisis.  they're about funding and guarantees, they're about capital and  they're about resolution authority ability to manage failure.  when you go into a crisis, you have this fundamental fog of diagnosis,  fog of worry.  you can't tell at the beginning.  you may not know even deep into it what the risk is.  it tips over into panic and run.  so in that context, you have to decide what's the most prudent strategy.  and i think the prudent strategy is at the beginning,  it's prudent to let the fire burn.  you have to let the system adjust a bit.  you don't want to try to sustain it at this artificial pre-crisis boom level.  you wanna let it consumes some of the weaker part of the system.  you have to be prepared to escalate very very quickly to draw a credible,  definitive fire break around the core of this system and make that very credible  if you're gonna protect the economy from the collapse that can cause depressions.  you want to make sure you set that perimeter.  no perfect way to set it, but you want to set it so you believe that you're  protecting those parts of the system that are fundamental to the oxygen  that the economy needs to recover, to the fundamental channels that  people depend on to borrow and therefore they are critical to lending.  [music] 
[music]  as i said, when you escalate, when the risks tip to the point where  they're existential, when you're living with the risk of a run or a run started,  and you have the risk to the economy is adjusting much more sharply,  falling off the cliff, collapsing at an alarming rate.  you're only gonna succeed in protecting people from the damage if  you deploy overwhelming force.  larry summers was the first to adopt a doctrine we call the powell doctrine,  which is a doctrine colin powell used to talk about in a national security context.  what he talked about in the national security context for the united states,  was to say we shall intervene when our national security institutions were  threatened, and only with overwhelming force relative to the threat we face, and  only with a clear exit strategy.  and larry applied this, or adopted this,  to describe the strategy that we supported a bunch of emerging market crises.  but it's very relevant for the developed economy too.  and what that means is you have to be willing to deploy your fiscal resources  alongside the tools a central bank has, with a very aggressive strategy to  restructure and recapitalize the financial system if you're gonna get traction.  the critical reason why the depth of our decline in activity was much shallower,  and the recovery sort of much more quickly, and us growth was much  more rapid, and we're in a much stronger position, that we had as much leveraging  as we did because we were able to deploy those resources together in concert.  not working against each other, but together.  and none of these would have worked as effectively in isolation.  you know the basic rule that monetary policy has a hard time getting traction if  people have already borrowed too much or  there's too much leverage in the financial system.  fiscal policy can help offset that, but not fully.  and if you don't have a functioning financial system,  the run collapse weakness in the core of the financial system will work  against even aggressively deployed fiscal monetary policy.  so they have to work together and they have to be deployed in a magnitude that's  large relative to the scale of the potential risk.  you have to plan for a long war.  these things take a lot of time.  there's this tragic graveyard of experience of financial crisis,  which just demonstrates once again how long it takes, how fragile recoveries are.  so you have to plan for a sustained period of support.  if you're more tentative, you withdraw quickly, you put on the brakes too  quickly, you end up coming back again and having to do it again, and try again.  and so there's a big case for not just being forceful early, but  to plan for a long period of sustained support.  and if you do that you're more likely to repair the damage more quickly and come  out of it with an economy that has got less damage to its productive capacity.  the rescue has to be conditional.  it can't be unconditional.  it has to be constrained by a bunch of broad judgments,  otherwise you're going to create too much moral hazard risk.  you know, bagehot said, famously,  you should lend at a penalty rate against reasonable collateral.  lend freely, and you have to do that and that's a good thing to do,  particularly for banks in that context.  but when you're going beyond that and you're thinking about  how you provide capital when you provide broader guarantees,  you want to make sure you have a regime that governs how that's applied so  that you're targeting at assistance to those that are conditionally solvent.  that you set a price on that so it's going to look expensive,  unattractive as conditions stabilize.  you want to make sure that you have the ability to put the weakest firms,  the nonviable ones, into resolution, into restructuring process, so  you're not sustaining the unsustainable.  and you want to try and do it quickly and forcefully.  there's a little paradox in this, in the sense that, if you do things that  are more dramatic and powerful in taking out risk early, it's easier to be tougher,  in the sense that you are more able to allow more restructuring.  if you're more definitive in the protections you provide to the core part  of the system.  and you have to distinguish the idiosyncratic crisis from the systemic,  the more typical crisis from the existential.  idiosyncratic, meaning a crisis that is more narrow in its incidence,  that involves the risk of failure, say, of a single institution,  because of things that institution did,  rather than the broader risk of recession or run on the system as a whole.  in a panic, you have to do the opposite, really, of what the traditional  response or the intuitive response seems like in a normal, normal crisis.  in a normal crisis fundamentally, you wanna have the ability to let firms fail,  you want hair creditors to absorb losses by imposing haircuts on them.  but in a panic, as we demonstrated in the fall of 08,  if you adopt that strategy the risk is you'll create a systemic disaster.  and as we saw, the costs of correcting for that mistake, are very expensive.  very hard to correct a mistake to the economy,  the economy is still going to suffer enormous damage from that.  and the fiscal costs, financial costs of trying to preserve the rest of the system  after adopting that strategy of failure to haircuts,  is much more dangerous, much more difficult, much more expensive.  and in some ways just to repeat, to extended paradox,  you have to be prepared to take more risk if you're gonna limit risk.  and it's only by being able to creditably take out the risk of a great depression,  and the risk of catastrophic collapse,  that ultimately you can improve the odds that your stuff works,  and you get the money back, and you're in positive return, so.  i think the understandable response to most of what we did was to say, gee,  they're taking ridiculous risk.  they're putting trillions and trillions of taxpayer's money at risk.  but it's only by being aggressive like that that you have the chance of having  your thinks work enough that you can protect the taxpayer from much worse loss.  and you know just to drive  this home you wanna keep some perspective on moral hazards.  there's no way to protect an economy from a great depression,  from a systemic collapse, without creating moral hazard.  you have to figure out a balance in it.  as we learn very painfully, even while it looked like relatively small institutions,  can be systemic in a fragile financial system.  and without the ability to deploy a mix of guarantees around the core of the system,  you allow too much failure on their periphery,  you're gonna end up imperiling the stability of the system as a whole.  and if you let that understandable,  intuitive fear about moral hazard constrain you from acting, or  if you let the politics, the terrible politics of bails constrain you from  acting in the face of panic, you're going to create a much greater risk and  pose much more damage on the innocent victims of the crisis.  [music] 
[music]  another distinction in mortgages, the way the language that's used in  the united states is between prime mortgages and non-prime mortgages.  prime mortgages also go by the name conforming or agency mortgages,  and that will be the terminology that people will use interchangeably.  and that matters because what makes a mortgage prime is that it conforms, that  it conforms to the standards that are set by the government-sponsored enterprises.  fannie mae and freddie mack, also called the agencies,  the housing agencies or frannie and freddie.  fannie and freddie have rules about their loans.  the first rule is it can't be bigger than a certain level for most of the history  leading up to the financial crisis in the united states, that level was $417,000.  so, any loan size bigger than $417,000 could not be conforming.  so, a second rule would be it would have to have a certain ratio of loan to value.  so the total amount, the value of the underlying property  would have to have a certain level relative to the loan size.  this is our kind of standard 20% down kinds of mortgages.  there would need to be a certain credit score for the borrower.  and there would be rules about occupancy.  so if the borrower has to live in the house and some income limits and  documentation.  so you have to document it and  you have to have a certain income being able to make the payments on the loan.  if you meet all of those criteria, then the agencies frannie or freddie  in the united states are allowed to buy the loans, buy the loans from the bank.  so, the bank will make the loan, the bank will then take that loan off their  balance sheet and sell the loan to the government agency.  so, that's one thing, and the government agency can guarantee the loan as in  if the person with the prime loan doesn't make their payments then the government  make the payments of principle and interest to whoever holds the loan.  that enables these loans to also be packaged into securities that are called  mortgage backed securities that are really just as a safe as any other government  securities since not only do you have the houses themselves but  you also have the government backing.  now there are some complications with mortgages.  the government doesn't guarantee that people will not prepay their mortgages,  or the government can't make any promises whether their interest rates will change  and people will be induced to prepay their mortgages.  but nevertheless on the payment, the timely payment of interest and principle.  we're going to see that any kind of conforming loan is going to be safer,  significantly safer than anything else that you can find out there in  the markets.  now, loans that would satisfy all of these criteria, except for  the fact that they're too big, those are called jumbo loans, or  if they're really, really big, super-jumbo loans.  so those loans are generally considered safe as well.  they tend to have all of the other features in place, but  they do not get the government guarantees.  so we would not call them conforming loans.  [music] 
[music]  we spoke in the previous lesson about sales and repurchase agreements.  shorthand, repo.  now let's talk a little more detail about how repo works.  it is effectively a new type of banking.  another way for a bank to take a deposit from some type of investor or  depositor and promise to pay it back.  so effectively,  the deposit is a short term, just like a deposit would be in a bank.  it receives interest.  and the difference is instead of insurance, it's backed by collateral.  the depositor takes legal ownership of that collateral.  so for example, if a large money-market mutual  fund wants to deposit $100 million with an investment bank,  they'll hand that $100 million over to the investment bank.  and the investment bank will respond by giving them $100 million or  more of bonds, which the money-market mutual fund then takes  legal ownership of in case they don't get paid back.  now what's important about this legal ownership is that, starting in 2005,  a broad class of bonds were carved out of the bankruptcy code.  and there is an allowance of unilateral termination by the non-defaulting party.  now let me talk a little bit about what that means and why it's important.  once again, if i represent the money market mutual fund and  i've handed $100 million of cash over to an investment bank, and  the investment bank hands me collateral in response to that.  and then tomorrow when i say, i would like my money back,  because we had signed a one-day repo agreement,  if the bank then says, i can't pay you back, sorry i don't have the cash.  i do not have to say, well, i'm taking you into bankruptcy.  i'm gonna go to the court and say, you haven't paid me back and then we have to  go through a very long bankruptcy process for me to be able to get my money back.  that's the way it would work for an ordinary business transaction.  instead, what we have is that repo has been given a special exemption,  a safe harbor out of the bankruptcy code.  so what i can do is say, you've defaulted, i'm just going to keep your collateral and  i'm just gonna turn around and sell it in the market and get all of my money back.  this turns out to be an extremely simple and  very low transactions cost way to promise repayment.  and part of the reason that in 2005,  the bankruptcy code was revised to allow a broader class of securities to get  carved out in this way is that the market participants were clamoring for it.  they were saying, what you used to let us just do in this world was only government  bonds, isn't enough.  we've run out of that kind of collateral.  we need more types of collateral that we can use so  people can promise to give us our money back.  now there's two types of repo that you will hear about, and  the distinction is not important for our purposes in this course.  but for some of the descriptions of specific instances,  you'll see these terms bandied about.  and the two types of repo are bilateral,  when two different parties are directly contracting with each other, and  tri-party, where there's some bank that stands in the middle.  bilateral repo is the example that i've been using all along so  far, which is money market mutual fund.  for example,  handing money over to an investment bank, who hands them collateral back.  in practice, when money market mutual funds are involved,  they usually wanna have a bank standing in the middle.  so the money market mutual fund, for example,  would hand their money to jp morgan.  jp morgan would hand the money over to the investment bank.  the investment bank would hand the collateral to jp morgan.  and everything would sit in custody at jp morgan.  now it turns out that tri-party repo has its own set of risks associated with it.  as you might imagine, jp morgan in that example is now on the hook,  if something were to happen to their counterparty, particularly because  of the complicated way that transactions get put together during the day.  in fact, that will play a role in the bankruptcy of lehman,  which we'll talk about in a later lesson of this module.  now, another term of art that you will hear with regards to repo is  rehypothecation, which is just a fancy way of saying reusing.  so you can reuse the collateral.  the money market mutual fund that hands over $100 million to a bank and  then the bank hands them a bond worth $100 million or more.  the money market mutual fund has legal title to that bond.  so they're actually allowed to take that bond themselves and sell it or  lend it out somewhere else.  they're not required to hold it on their balance sheet the entire time.  in this respect, the bonds that are used as collateral in  repo end up playing a very similar role to money.  they could be transferred from pocket to pocket.  and in the end, when you have to unwind the transaction, you're not  always in most instances required to give exactly the bonds back that you borrowed.  but rather, some bond that has the same value or  is similar to it on other characteristics.  this makes repo a type of money.  so effectively, it can transfer through and  multiply the same way that money can through the economy.  and in fact that's how it was used  often in the years leading up to the financial crisis.  now i've mentioned that collateral will often exceed  the amount of money that was borrowed.  you will over-collateralize the loan.  and that makes sense.  if i'm gonna give you $100 million of cash,  i don't want a bond just worth $100 million.  that doesn't really promise that you'll pay me back tomorrow because the bond  might end up losing a little bit of its value between today and tomorrow.  and if i'm making the loan for a full month, the bond might lose its value for  sure over that full month.  so often you will see collateral value  exceeding the amount of cash that has been deposited.  and this is called a haircut.  now unfortunately, the word haircut, in addition to its regular everyday meaning  of cutting your hair, has a variety of meanings in the financial world.  the meaning that it has within repo,  is that there'll be some small percentage difference,  usually a small percentage difference, between the collateral value and the cash.  for example, if you were to give me bonds worth $100 million,  and i was just to give you back $98 million in cash, that's the only loan or  deposit that i made, we would call that a 2% haircut.  because the $2 million difference represents 2% of the bond value.  haircuts will play a very large role in what went on during the panic because  if haircuts go up, that is effectively tantamount to withdrawal from the bank.  if you give me a $100 million worth of collateral and i'm only giving you $98,  that's a 2% haircut.  but if i suddenly get more nervous about the collateral's value, and  i'm only willing to give you, say, $90 for every $100 of collateral.  that is as though, i have just come and taken $8 million out of your bank.  we're gonna call that the run on repo and  discuss that in a later lesson of this module.  this table will give a sense of just how important repo  finance was to the major broker-dealers.  we see here morgan stanley, goldman sachs, lehman brothers, merrill lynch, and  bear stearns, the five major independent investment bank broker-dealers that  existed as of the beginning of 2008.  and we're gonna summarize some information in this table taken from the most  recent sec filings that they had prior to the financial crisis.  so in the case of morgan stanley, goldman sachs, lehman brothers, and  merrill lynch, that is as of the second quarter of 2008.  for bear stearns, it's gonna be in the first quarter of 2008 since  they didn't exist as an independent firm in the second quarter.  in the first line of numbers that you see in this table is the total amount of  financial instruments owned by each of these institutions.  so the first thing to note is that this is a just very big number relative to what  you might have thought the size was from an equity perspective  of these institutions.  so for morgan stanley and goldman sachs were right around $400 billion.  for lehman brothers and merrill lynch, right around 300 billion.  and for bear stearns, about 140 billion.  so in total, these five institutions have 1.5 trillion,  approximately 1.5 trillion of financial instruments owned.  now how do they finance these?  in the next line, we see the total amount of financial instruments  that have been pledged as part of repo finance.  so, in these cases, for the totals in that row, the institutions  are pledging as collateral the assets on their balance sheet.  and they're getting back cash.  it's effectively how they're paying for, how they're financing and  holding in inventory, these financial instruments.  for the five firms, you can see in the last row the percentage of all of  their assets that they own that are pledged,  which represents the percentage that are financed by repo.  and you can see that for morgan stanley, it's 50%, 39% for goldman sachs,  46% for lehman brothers, 28% for merrill lynch, and 55% for bear stearns.  overall, of the 1.5 trillion, 42% are financed by repo,  a very, very significant form of finance for all of these broker-dealers.  [music] 
[music]  okay, just a few notes in conclusion.  financial crises are terrible.  they're not fully preventable, but we can do a lot to reduce the damage.  the damage in our crisis was bad, but nothing like it could have been.  and it would have been even better, our outcomes would have been even better, if  we had been able to escalate more quickly and sustain the emergency support longer.  there's lots of causes to financial crises, but the fundamental cause,  the most important cause of the most damaging crises is the spread of  the belief that it's safe to borrow, and safe to lend on a traumatic scale.  fundamental to our crisis  was a huge build up in debt financed in very dangerous ways.  and that left our system vulnerable to a classic run, a classic panic.  something we hadn't seen since the great depression.  our response was messy and imperfect, but ultimately we were able to mobilize  the full force of the united states in new and creative ways.  to break the panic, to get the economy growing again,  to repair much of the damage.  this strategy was effective because it was very different  from the strategy adopted in the great depression, and very different from  the strategy adopted by most countries in the last century of financial crises.  there's a lot you can do to make the financial system resilient and  more safe for failure.  and our system is much safer today because of the reforms that we have made to make  capital and liquidity requirements much more conservative, and  to dramatically expand the scope of their reach.  but remember this thing about rivers and stones,  risk will find its way around those constraints.  over time, risk can migrate.  and be careful that you don't end up making banks safer but  the overall system less stable by allowing excessive growth  in the unregulated part of the financial system, as we did before the crisis.  and don't have too much confidence in the power of these regulatory safeguards.  they cannot protect you from the extreme crisis.  ultimately, hopefully not for a long time from now,  you'll need a fire station that's able to act quickly, and with overwhelming force,  to protect people from the mayhem and carnage that comes in financial crises.  it's a delusion and it's irresponsible to think  that locking the doors of the fire station is an effective way to prevent fires.  and when you face the fire, if you wanna be effective in preventing greater damage  to the innocent victims of crisis, you have to be prepared to do the unpopular,  the politically offensive actions that  will unavoidably benefit the risk taker and the imprudent.  in the service of preventing broader damage.  i hope these lectures stand as a modest tribute to the men and  women of the treasury and the federal reserve, and the fdic, who played such  an important role in acting to protect the american economy from a great depression.  they were brave and creative.  they were human.  not perfect.  but they tried to focus on doing the right thing.  and they kept trying.  trying to honor the roosevelt exhortation, the great depression,  that what the country needed was bold persistent experimentation.  there's a lot of value for our successors in our experience in the crisis.  a better set of tools, better knowledge of what works, and what doesn't work.  we hope we left them a better playbook.  [music] 
[music]  so we've been talking about the demand for safe assets.  what about the supply?  is there a way that all these large institutional cash pools, for example,  could have satisfied their demands with supplies that were currently outstanding?  one very important fact about the demand that these institutional cash pools had  for safe assets is that, unlike the foreign demand, large investors,  large institutional investors, very very focused on short-term assets.  so it's not just long-term government bonds that they want.  in fact, it's very specifically short-term government securities and  short-term agency securities that they demand.  so how much of this is out there and could those demands be satisfied?  okay. typically,  we're going to look to a few places.  we're gonna look to precious metals.  historically, that would have been the only place that you could have gone,  if you go before we had any stable governments.  you look to the debt and the currency of stable countries.  and as we've talked about already, by 2007, we're running out of u.s.  securities for this purpose.  let's see in this table, also coming from pozsar's work,  just where things stood as we led up to the financial crisis.  along the top we see the years represented.  we're going to go from before the crisis until after,  from 2005 to after the worst was over in 2010.  the outstanding amounts, first, of short-term treasury  securities in the united states and short-term agency securities.  again, the agencies are fannie mae and freddie mac,  the large government-sponsored enterprises in the united states.  the total amount of short-term debt that was available, and  these are treasury bills, or treasury securities,  treasury bonds that have a remaining maturity of one year or less.  so everything here that is going to, in the next year,  mature, we're going to define those as short-term.  we see that the total amount outstanding in 2005 and  2006 was just 1.7 trillion and 1.6 trillion.  and i say just relative to the sizes that we've seen  in the previous lessons of just how much demand was out there.  the foreign official holdings, so  these are government holdings of short-term treasury securities and  short-term agency securities, are relatively low compared to this total.  so if we focus just on the short-term securities, that's not really,  the problem is not coming just from the global savings glut countries.  they were predominantly demanding longer-term government assets.  instead, it's the demand from institutional cash pools.  institutional cash pools, based on available data, just to get a sense of  their size, an institutional cash pool's estimate of their total volume,  that was the two different lines in the graph that we saw in the previous lesson.  if we add together the foreign official holdings and then the estimated demand  from institutional cash pools, we see that already by 2005,  at the very bottom of the table, there was a deficit of over $1 trillion.  this deficit would grow even more severe in  2006 and in 2007 before falling during the crisis.  it fell during the crisis predominantly because the u.s. government started to  issue much more in the way of treasury securities and agency securities.  so the u.s. government made up the gap once the crisis hit.  prior to the crisis, however, this gap was being filled almost exclusively  with aaa securities that have been manufactured by the financial system.  these are the things that people often hear about that got us into trouble.  and we'll be talking about those in the lessons to come.  [music] 
[music]  so we're talking about safe assets.  something that an investor can put their money into and not have to worry about it.  not have to think, uh-oh,  when i wake up in the morning i'm gonna have to figure out whether this  asset is actually still going to be worth what i need it to be worth.  something that looks like money.  the key feature of safe assets is something that  we're going to call in this course information insensitivity.  information insensitivity is an important term in economics.  what it refers to is that when i enter into a transaction with you,  i am not at all worried that you have an incentive  to produce information to try to figure out whether  the transaction that we're entered into is going to be beneficial to you or me.  think of the best example, that is just money.  when i hand you a dollar bill, you don't think, wait a second, i'm gonna go and  i'm going to look, and i'm going to try to figure out whether this dollar bill is  really worth a dollar bill.  or really worth more than $1 or less than $1.  you don't do that,  there's no reason to do that, because you know that it's basically worth $1.  the same goes for government bonds.  so when we have an asset that nobody has to think about,  that we can just transfer back and forth, because even if this particular  asset has some features that don't make it completely risk free.  and after all, to some extent, money is not completely risk free,  there could be inflation tomorrow.  there's really no reason that the two people who are talking to each other  are going to have any additional knowledge about this.  they're just going to exchange it.  it would make no sense for  you to try to figure out exactly what's going on with it.  this is not the same thing as being risk free.  risk free which means under all circumstances this thing,  the thing that we are exchanging will be worth exactly what we want it to be worth  in buying goods and services.  that's a stricter definition.  certainly anything that is risk free would be information insensitive.  but you can have things like, for example, long-term government bonds.  they're not risk free.  there's some chance that in the future, interest rates will go up and  the value of your bond will fall.  or inflation will go up and the value of your bond will fall.  what's important about long-term governments bonds is that right now,  you kinda think these things are priced correctly.  and that the person that you're talking to and exchanging that bond with  does not have any huge advantage, nor would they really have any way to come up  with a huge advantage in figuring out what the bond is worth.  that is going to be the cleanest definition that we have of a safe asset.  one that is insensitive to information.  sometimes we also think of this as having no adverse selection.  that's a term in economics that has existed for a long time.  adverse selection just means two parties to a transaction.  and at the time that those two parties are signing the deal, they have  the same information as each other about the item that they're transacting over.  when you're in that kind of world, you can do things very quickly.  what are some good examples of this?  the one that we've started discussing is currency.  so with regards to $1, i can hand $1 to you, you hand $1 back to me.  we don't have to think about whether or not this is truly worth $1.  government bonds of stable countries would be information insensitive.  so that would include now, the united states, certainly germany, certainly  the united kingdom, and some other very large, apparently safe countries.  every once in a while,  however, a country that you thought was safe, suddenly isn't safe.  so, some of the peripheral countries in the euro area are examples of that now.  when something moves from being information insensitive, from being, hey,  i didn't have to think about this at all, to being something where  suddenly people think i'm not sure whether or not this is truly safe.  let's think about it for awhile.  that transition can be very damaging,  and in fact, it is that transition that often leads to a run on a bank.  if you think about the example of,  your money is in a bank, which is our next piece.  insured deposits in banks, those are safe as long as the government is stable.  but how about the money over the insured level?  now, one day you're thinking, i think this large bank, this jp morgan or  citigroup, or any other large bank, not to pick on anyone specific.  i think that this bank is safe.  if the next day, you wake up and you hear some news that makes you think it's not  safe, it has suddenly gone from being information insensitive,  where yesterday, you didn't worry about it at all.  you didn't worry that the person who was talking to you about the bank knew  something about your deposits.  to a world where suddenly you're worried.  and of course, the best thing to do when you're worried that whether your $1 is  worth an actual $1 is to go and take your money out of the bank.  here's some bad examples that don't work,  that really cannot be information insensitive.  first would be stocks.  so, the stock market, it's not that the stock market is rigged or unfair.  it's just that it's quite clear that there's a real benefit to going and  studying and figuring out what a company is worth.  and if i am an uninformed investor, and someone comes to me and  wants to offer me equity in a company, i might be a little worried that that person  knew more than i did about what the company was worth.  the private debt of third parties would be another bad example.  so the debt of a country?  stable, information insensitive if it's a stable country.  the debt of my friend john, if i gave you that debt and i said, look,  john gave me this iou.  i don't have any money in my pocket right now.  let me give you the iou that john gave me, and now,  you'll have that instead of money.  you would say, whoa, i don't know john and even if i knew john, i'd have to spend  a lot of time figuring out whether he was actually going to pay me back.  and as we've discussed, the government bonds of unstable countries.  a country can go from being stable to unstable.  when that happens, we would say it's shifting from its debt being  information insensitive to its debt being information sensitive.  [music] 
all right so now we have a basic structure for securitization.  now let's see what actually happened,  specifically what happened in the years leading up to the global financial crisis.  in the united states, mortgage backed securities, so these are securitization  but these are bonds issued by trusts, built through these securitizations,  with mortgages as the assets that are underlying everything.  they were dominated by the agencies, the government sponsored  enterprises of fannie mae and freddie mac until about 2003.  you can see this in the picture that's up on the screen now.  the solid line shows the total amount of mortgage related securities issuance.  this is mortgage backed securities.  here's the total amount is the solid line.  the dotted line is the total amount that has been issued,  guaranteed by, the agencies, fannie mae and freddie mac.  looking at these two lines you can see that up until  2003 they are very close together.  the most important thing about this picture is to notice the gap  between the dotted line and solid line that emerges after 2003.  that gap is what you will hear called private label mortgage backed securities.  so, not coming out through fannie mae and freddie mac, but  rather through some other entity and not having any kind of government guarantee.  the two major types are shown at the bottom.  the line that goes higher is rmbs,  which stands for residential mortgage backed securities.  and the dotted line is cmbs or commercial mortgage backed securities.  residential mortgage backed securities are,  as you might expect, backed by residential mortgages.  these are going to be mortgages that do not qualify for  the government sponsored enterprise guarantees.  so as anyone who was trying to get a mortgage during this time may know,  the way that it worked is the government will guarantee mortgages,  but only mortgages up to a certain level.  a level that has varied somewhat over time.  and only mortgages where the underlying mortgage borrower meets certain criteria.  so those are the gse or agency mortgages.  ones that don't fit that, either because the mortgage is too large or  because the borrower doesn't qualify, are what we see down at the bottom.  the dotted line down at the bottom of residential mortgage backed securities.  cmbs, or commercial mortgage backed securities, have backed in them,  a whole set of commercial loans, these are loans made to businesses.  and again, there is no government program that would enable us to guarantee these in  the form that we have here.  these are going to be banks taking things off of their balance sheet, putting them  into a trust, and then selling securities, and the cash flows come from that trust. 
[music]  all right that's mortgages.  mortgages are certainly the most popular way to stand  behind a bond in securitization.  this is not surprising.  mortgages have been the main thing on bank balance sheets for a long time as well.  but there are other things, other types of loans that don't require any more work  from the lending authority after they've been made that are very good candidates to  get put into one of these trusts and used in securitization.  in the united states, non-mortgage asset-back security issuance  also increased sharply in the early 2000s.  abs is the general term.  you will sometimes hear people say abs for asset back securities,  to include all types of loans, including mortgage backed securities.  sometimes confusingly, they will just use asset-backed securities to refer to  all things that don't have mortgages in them.  to be safe, i'm just going to call them non-mortgage asset-backed securities,  or non-mortgage abs.  and here's our picture.  and as a form of comparison, what we're gonna do is,  compare the amount of asset-backed securities that were issued  to the total amount of corporate debt that was issued.  type of bond that people are most familiar thinking about is the bond that comes from  a single corporation.  you have ibm or any other large corporation that issues debt, and  that debt will be denominated by the name of the corporation, and  it will have a certain seniority.  in some respects, a corporation is similar to a securitization vehicle,  in that it has lots of assets on its balance sheet, it's going to sell equity,  which is like the bottom trench, and it's going to sell debt.  which, the more senior it is, is going to be at a different level for investors.  so, in some ways it's similar, but in some ways it's different.  for corporate debt, of course, the company,  we'll take ibm as an example, not only are you buying a claim on their assets, but  you're taking the risk, once again, that their management  also may make decisions of what to do with those assets that you may not agree with.  if instead, ibm, after making sales of computers and  financing those sales to its customers, bundled all of the loans for  those computer sales and put them into a trust, they could create their  own vehicle, which effectively be an asset-backed security.  which would effectively issue asset-backed securities once that vehicle was created.  what the picture shows is just how much of this activity was going on.  if you look back in the 1990s, it wasn't zero, so  there was several hundred billion dollars per year that were going on.  by the time we reached the late 1990s,  it's over 200 billion of asset-backed debt that's being issued each year.  that is the red dotted line.  solid line is the straight corporate debt, the standard thing that we just think of.  a bond issued by ibm or a bond issued by walmart, etc.  and there is a gap between the two,  more straight corporate debt was being issued than asset-backed debt.  look what happens during the global savings glut period.  so beginning in 2003, the red line sharply increases.  and by the time we reach 2007,  we've actually even had a year where the amount of asset-backed debt was  just as much as the amount of debt issued by all corporations in the united states,  public debt by all corporations in the united states.  furthermore, very little of the blue is going to turn out to be aaa debt.  very hard for a company to issue too much debt, which truly in the end,  seems super safe to people.  but in a securitization vehicle,  by properly trouncing, you can issue a fair amount of aaa debt.  in more securitizations, something between two-thirds and  three-quarters of the securitization will end up with the aaa highest rating.  [music] 
[music]  all right.  it's time to tackle securitization.  in securitization, we're going to do this actual manufacturing activity.  let's figure out how it works legally.  here's a picture.  what you see here has several different pieces to it.  this is a relatively straightforward structure for securitization.  this is how you could manufacture safe assets from a collection of assets  that by themselves, each taken individually, isn't necessarily safe.  you start by taking those assets, any set of such assets,  like mortgages, and putting them in a trust pool.  that's the box in the middle of this diagram.  so the trust receives the assets from an originating firm.  the originating firm should be thought of here as a bank, but  it really could be anything.  it could be an auto company which is originating auto leases or  a credit card company that has credit card debt, but our simplest example to  think about is a bank that has mortgages on its balance sheet.  that's the originating firm all the way at the left of the diagram.  the originating firm then places these assets into a trust,  the box in the middle.  and that is a sale.  the trust is handing cash back to the original firm for  the assets and now owns these assets.  the trust sits in the middle.  the firm is now out, the bank, now out of the transaction.  this is a step called pooling,  the pooling of assets which we see in purple towards the bottom of the slide.  there's a master owner of this trust pool of assets.  this master owner is term of art, a special purpose vehicle.  it is a separate entity set up legally as a trust.  importantly, this entity cannot go bankrupt.  so this entity has rules.  and the rules are it may at some point have obligations, and  if it's unable to meet those obligations, instead of declaring bankruptcy,  the way a corporation would, it follows the rules that are written down  in its founding documents to liquidate itself and  to distribute the proceeds out to the claimants.  this is going to turn out to be an important step.  now, where does this trust get its money from in order to be able  to buy these assets from the bank?  well, it gets its money by issuing bonds, and  the bonds that it's issued are the asset-backed securities,  the abs that we talk about throughout this entire course.  in this case, since the assets that are backing the securities are mortgages,  we could more precisely call them mortgage-backed securities.  now, these securities come in different tranches,  this fancy french word tranche, tranche.  you'll hear people pronounce it multiple ways.  and what this means is we're going to slice up the assets of the trust,  all of these mortgages, so that there is a senior layer, then there's a layer just  below it, a layer just below it, and then finally a layer all the way at the bottom.  for this whole pooling of mortgages, what it will mean is i have put together,  let's say, 10,000 mortgages.  they're all supposed to pay off.  and i am now going to sell a bond that is secured by all of these payoffs.  the most senior bonds that i could do will get the first set of  payments from all of the mortgage holders.  each layer will have to then wait until the more senior layer has been paid before  they get paid.  and all the way at the bottom would be called the equity tranche.  and the equity tranche would be the very very last piece that would be paid off and  would be risky.  many times, most times, the originating firm has  to hold onto the past tranche themselves, because there is no buyer for them.  these buyers are, what we label all the way over on the right,  securitization investors.  these are the buyers of the asset-backed securities.  most buyers are out there looking for aaa bonds.  some will take aa bonds.  there's a group of enterprising investors willing to hold onto the bbbs and  then it is again that last tranche that is typically held  onto by the originating firm.  now, we see highlighted on the figure the senior aaa tranche.  that's the tranche that is going to be considered the safe asset.  and that asset will be safe as long as there is enough below it  in the capital structure so that investors  don't even really have to think about whether they're going to be paid back.  that is, if the senior tranche represents, say, 75% of the overall asset,  of the overall value of the trust, then there's 25% below it.  the value of the pool of assets would need to fall by 25% or  more before the senior tranche would be in any danger of not being paid back.  that's why we call this manufacturing safe assets.  because it could be the case that for any given individual asset that had been  placed into this trust pool, there's enough complication about that asset that  nobody would be willing to accept that asset on its own and think of it as safe.  but once we pool the assets together and  state clearly what the rules are by which assets are put into the pool,  investors can have confidence, or at least did have confidence for  quite some time, that the senior tranche was safe.  [music] 
[music]  secretary geithner in his lecture talked about runnable debt as an important  precursor to crises.  runnable debt is effectively money, and it comes in many forms.  in its simplest form, such debt is produced by banks,  in the form of demand deposits.  in the more complicated form that we started to see in  the run up to the crisis, it came in a wide variety of  forms created by what was called the shadow banking system.  today i'm gonna talk about the shadow banking system and the various ways that  it can create runnable debt, money-like safe securities.  start with a picture.  in this picture, we see the standard way that banks would create safe debt.  you would have a depositor, could just be a retail investor,  it could be a small business.  and the depositor would give dollars to the bank.  that's step a.  and that's the dollars that are flowing down from the depositor to the bank.  the bank then takes those dollars and loans them out to a borrower.  let's say somebody who needs the money for a mortgage for a house.  the bank takes, onto their balance sheet, the arrow that coming up,  which is a loan, which is an obligation of the borrower and an asset to the bank.  what the bank gives back to the depositor is a savings account or  a checking account which is insured.  which means in this case in the united states as of 2007,  $100,000 by the depositor could be put into the bank and  would be insured by the federal government.  specifically by the fdic.  so we have step a where the depositor is giving money to the bank.  they can take that money out any time from their insured savings or checking account.  and then step b, the bank is handing that to a borrower.  it's a small business loan or a mortgage.  now the borrower does not have to give that back any time the bank asks.  so the borrower may have a long term debt to the bank,  the bank has a short term debt back to the depositor.  from the perspective of the depositor, it's completely safe,  because the government has guaranteed that they will be paid back no matter what,  up to $100,000.  so this is the standard way that we would create money.  at least back until the civil war in the united states.  it was a very long history and as i talked about in the very first module,  we saw problems with this until we came up with the idea of insuring the savings.  the insurance function started nationally  just after the worst part of the great depression.  so now what's the problem?  why can't we can't keep doing this forever?  why can't we just have, everytime anybody needs safe debt, they just hand it to  a bank and it's insured by the government and we can go on completely safe forever?  the problem is, insurance is limited.  in the united states at this time, it was limited to $100,000.  if you make insurance unlimited,  that's effectively saying the government is ensuring the entire banking system,  no matter how rich you are and no matter how much risk the bank takes.  nobody thinks that that's a good idea.  so, what do we do?  suppose that i'm a depositor, a large depositor.  maybe i'm a sovereign wealth fund, or a large money market mutual fund.  or a large corporation like apple, that has a $100 billion of cash.  where can i put that cash and know that it's safe?  if i hand it to a bank, all i have is protection on the first $100,000.  so what do i do for the rest?  that's essentially where what we call the shadow banking system comes in.  and i'm gonna give you a relatively complex picture next.  but don't worry, we will start talking about it now, and  then we'll be talking about it at length throughout this module and  throughout many of the modules that come later in this course.  okay, in this figure, we're gonna have the same exact function.  again, we have an investor.  but now, we're going to be explicit and  say that this is an institutional investor.  this is some investor with a large amount of money, that needs to be put in place.  on the left are the investors who may be  giving money to that institutional investor.  that is, retail investors.  so a retail investor, that would be an ordinary consumer,  like me, or a small business.  they can give their money directly to a bank, but they also sometimes give it  directly to an institutional investor, like a money market mutual fund.  sometimes institutional investors are there without taking the money from  anyone else.  that would be an example of a sovereign wealth fund or a large corporation.  basically think of it as a big money pool.  and that's our key idea.  now as we discussed, they can't give their money directly to a bank.  instead, they're going to, even if they give it directly to a bank,  need some way of making sure they're getting paid back.  the bank in the middle of the figure is still doing what banks do.  it's handing money out to borrowers, maybe in the form of houses or  in the form of a small business loan.  but now the difference is,  some of the money that they've received isn't going to be insured.  so a lot of what goes on, in the so called shadow banking system  is a way to figure out just how can we make sure that this money is safe.  in this picture, there are two ways that you will see this happening.  one way is that instead of the bank giving a demand deposit back.  so instead of the bank taking the mortgages on its balance sheet and saying,  this keeps us safe, the mortgages on our balance sheet keep us safe, give us money,  and the first $100,000 of it will be insured.  the bank says hm, don't go through us, i'll tell you what we're gonna do,  we're gonna take the mortgages off our balance sheet.  we're gonna put them over here in this box.  this box, we're gonna call, securitization.  and it's something that we're gonna talk a lot about.  so instead of saying my money goes to the bank, and the bank has managers and  people and branches, and it also has assets like mortgages.  we're gonna put it over here and  we're going to put it in a box that we call securitization.  take it off of the banks balance sheet and  say that you the investor are going to buy a slice of this directly.  so now, you don't have to worry so much about what the bank is doing.  all you have to worry about is what this slice of assets is doing.  furthermore, what the bank will do, and this is something we'll talk about later.  what the bank will do is basically take the first  slice of risk out of those assets.  so all you're really getting is the last and safest piece of those assets.  so now instead of giving your money to the bank,  you just buy a slice of what used to be the bank's portfolio, the banks assets.  and you take that slice and that becomes your collateral,  that becomes the safe thing that is giving you protection.  a second way to do this is a little more indirect.  instead of going and  just buying the securities by yourself, as the institutional investor.  you say to the bank, i will give you my $1 million or $10 million deposit.  but since you can only insure $100,000 of it, i would like you to give me some  additional collateral that i can hold to make sure that i am safe.  that's the arrow that we see here that  goes from the bank to the investor that says collateral.  the collateral makes the investor feel extra safe.  just like you would feel extra safe if you gave somebody money and  not only did you know the government was protecting you for the first part of it.  but they handed you something you could hold to make sure if they didn't pay  you back, you would have that protection.  collateral is useful, because in normal times  you can quickly sell it in the market and get all of the money back.  it's the best form of insurance that you can have, because of its speed.  in panic times you may not be able to sell collateral back in the market.  it's why in particular this system can start to breakdown if people are panicking  and thinking that they won't be able to unload their collateral.  the process by which the collateral insures an investor.  and the money goes from the investor to the bank, or to whatever financial  intermediary we have, is something called a repurchase agreement.  and once again that will play a central role in discussing what happened during  the crisis.  for now all you have to do is think about these things as other ways  an investor can feel safe when they give a demand deposit to a bank.  [music] 
[music]  we begin this module with a discussion of shadow banking.  which is a review of a discussion that we had in an earlier module, where we had  less information at that time about what the components of shadow banking were.  let's look again at the picture that we saw in the earlier module.  and this is a figure that shows on balance sheet financing.  this is traditional banking and  traditional banking is really quite easy to understand.  we have a depositor who has the cash, the depositor hands the money to a bank, as  long as this amount of money is below the limit in the united states, for example,  that is insured, then those savings or checking account will be insured.  and that's the arrow that goes back to the depositor.  so we have the dollars going from the depositor to the bank.  and then we have insured account going back to the depositor.  the bank will then loan out those dollars to a borrower,  say for a mortgage or for a small business loan, and  the asset the bank will get in return will be the loan itself.  so they'll be able to collect on that loan over time.  this is nice simple banking.  and the key step here that lead to a lower frequency of panics  was the insurance of savings, that we see in that top step.  now things change over time, and now in figure two we're gonna see a picture of  shadow banking, off-balance-sheet financing.  and now, with a bit more specificity than we examined when we first  did this in the module on safe assets and the global savings glut.  here i've filled in some of the boxes that were generalized there  with some specific actors.  we're going to start again as we did in the previous picture  with retail investors.  and they're in the top left corner.  and the retail investors, now instead of giving their money directly to a bank,  are going to hand it over to a money market mutual fund.  that's mmmf.  and perhaps the reason the reason they're doing that is that these retail investors  are very large investors.  they have a lot of money that would exceed  the levels that would be protected under insurance from the fdic.  the retail investors hand dollars over to the money market mutual funds and,  technically, what they receive back are shares.  so a money market mutual fund is not technically a bank but  rather a fund that sells shares.  and they receive back those shares from the money market mutual fund.  and typically, and absolutely at this time for  retail investors, if you gave a dollar to a money market mutual fund,  they would just keep the value of your investment at a dollar at all times.  if the value of investment fell slightly below a dollar,  they were allowed to continue to say it was a dollar until it fell by too much.  if it fell by too much, then either the sponsor of the money market mutual fund  would themselves have to prop up the fund by putting money in, or they would have to  admit it had fallen below a dollar, something called breaking a buck.  that's something that really we would never see happen  until the financial crisis.  so our first step is similar in that we have retail investors  giving money to a financial institution.  but now the financial institution is a money market mutual fund,  which stands between the investors and, ultimately, some kind of bank.  so that's step two.  the money market mutual fund hands money over to the bank, and  the bank, what they give back to the money market mutual fund is no longer  a savings account or a checking account, but rather, they give back collateral.  and they give back collateral because were to say well, this is a checking account or  a savings account and you have an account with us now, it would not be insured.  money market mutual fund that's making a deposit of $50 million or  $100 million with the bank, wants to make sure they're gonna get their money back.  and since insurance doesn't cover that, what they're gonna ask for is collateral.  and this transaction, in step 2, is something called the sales and  repurchase agreement or goes by the shorthand of just repo.  and in repo, effectively the money market mutual fund takes  legal title to the collateral, hands over the money, and  if they don't get their money back, they just keep their collateral.  this can happen through a variety of other steps as well.  for example, the bank may not have enough collateral  in order to give it over to the money market mutual fund.  what they have on their balance sheet perhaps are actual loans.  so what they do, in step 4, is they'll go back and forth  between securitization, which is what we studied earlier in an earlier module,  create from the raw material of the loans forms of asset-backed securities,  mortgage-backed securities,  that they can use as collateral, bring them back onto their balance sheet and  then exchange them for the money market mutual funds and repo in step 2.  they get those loans on their balance sheet in the first place by taking all  the dollars that they have received from the money market mutual funds in step 2,  and handing them over to borrowers in return for loans.  so, step 3, where banks are interacting with borrowers,  is identical to the step b that we see in this diagram, where banks and  borrowers are interacting in step b for loans.  in shadow banking, that step b becomes step 3, where loans and  dollars are being exchanged between banks and borrowers.  the banks now, however, instead of just keeping them on their balance sheets  are interacting with step 4 to create securitizations,  to receive back in return bonds, and to be able to use those bonds as collateral for  their money market mutual funds.  money market mutual funds may also be purchasers directly of this collateral.  we see that in step 5, where they just buy from the securitization  vehicles directly, the bonds, and give cash over.  that cash would then get recycled back to the bank in the same way.  so by this method, the banks are managing to finance all of the activity  that they're doing with borrowers, but they're doing it through multiple steps.  and those multiple steps are necessary because nobody will give  the bank the amount of money that they need to do this on an uninsured basis.  they have to come up instead with a clever way to promise that that money  will eventually get back to the ultimate investor.  now what we have in these boxes could be replaced.  money market mutual funds are one possible financial  intermediary that could be taking money from retail investors.  but in general, you can think of that box as being any large institutional cash  pool of the type that we studied in the module on the global savings glut.  any place that there is a large amount of money, where some of that investment  we would like to be safe, if it's our money we'd like some of it be safe.  we can't just hand it to an institution on an uninsured basis so  we're going to get collateral for it.  so that's what we could see there.  what we call a bank here, which in the commercial banking  world we understand well, in this world could be any financial institution that is  engaged in making loans to borrowers, warehousing those loans, and  recycling them, either out to the large institutional pools, as collateral,  or taking it through securitization first, and then recycling it as collateral.  so a bank, here, could be an investment bank, or  a very large insurance company, or a traditional bank.  it would not have to follow the same rules for  depositors as would the traditional banks that we saw in the previous figure.  the key thing to recognize here is that off-balance sheet financing is serving  the same economic function as the on-balance sheet financing.  shadow banking is banking.  and it can run in to the same types of problems that banking can,  which is exactly what we will see happen in the panic.  [music] 
[music]  all right, let's look at some facts.  what happens when people are unable to pay their mortgages is there is foreclosure.  so i have a payment, perhaps it is because my rate adjusted and  i can't pay it, perhaps it is just because i lost my job and i can't pay it.  and ultimately, if i'm unable to make the payments on my house, then the bank or  whoever owns the mortgage will have the right to foreclose upon the house and  to take the house as collateral to pay off the loan that i can no longer pay off.  in the united states foreclosure was  a phenomenon across the entire country, and in fact it was a global phenomenon,  there was a foreclosure crisis which is really a part of  the housing crisis all over the world, not in every country, but all over the world.  in the united states it happened in every state but it was predominantly in  what we call is shorthand the sand states, cuz they have a lot of beaches or  deserts and that is arizona, california, florida, and nevada.  and in those four sand states, we see foreclosure being more severe.  more houses in foreclosure than we see in other parts of the country.  this is a picture and  the source is from the mortgage bankers association national delinquency survey.  here we're just going to look across the united states total and  then separate that out into the sand states and the non-sand states.  again, the sand states are california, florida, arizona, and nevada.  so for the united states total, that is the middle line.  and in the united states overall,  there was an 8.7% of all homes are in serious delinquency.  which means mortgages are 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure.  so that's gonna be a mortgage delinquency.  and by 2010, really the peak of the crisis in 2009,  we're at 8.7% overall in the united states.  if you divide this into either the sand states or the non-sand states,  you see we're at 13.6% in the sand states and  7.0% in all of the other states all put together.  interestingly, the sand state line is below the national average  until we hit the crisis in 2007.  so, it would be in precisely those states where the foreclosure rate and  the delinquency rates very low, where people could easily form the expectations,  hey, housing looks like a great investment and it looks like it's gonna go up and  the banks could form the impression that delinquencies really don't happen here.  that of course climbs above the us rate, but not until approximately 2007.  okay, in addition to being able to look at the parts of  the country where we had more foreclosure, we can also look at the types of loans.  as it was for geography, all types of loans had elevated foreclosure rates.  but the worst were the highest rates for sub-prime loans and  for adjustable rate mortgages.  so a similar picture is coming from the same source,  the mortgage bankers association national delinquency survey.  now we're going to break up the loans into four different types.  so we have a box.  they're either sub-prime or prime, and they're either fixed rate or  adjustable rate.  so we have a two by two matrix, and we could put all our numbers in a box, and  we can see which one you're in.  the highest of course is sub-prime adjustable rate mortgages.  which peaked at greater than 40% in serious delinquency or  foreclosure by 2009.  now note interestingly that that delinquency rate was below that for  the next group which is sub-prime fixed rate mortgages  which peaked just over 20% in 2009 but as of 2005 was actually  a slightly higher rate than we would see for these sub prime adjustable rates.  this is interesting because once again where many of these loans were being made,  it did not appear to anybody that this was a particularly dangerous thing to do.  now of course at this time interest rates had been low for quite some time.  so, rates that had been adjusting were not adjusting to any extremely high level.  down below, you can see the two lines for prime loans.  prime adjustable rate and  prime fixed rate had effectively zero delinquency rates until 2007.  basically nothing, but  even the very lowest line on this picture, the prime fixed rate grew  to have approximately a 5% delinquency rate by 2009.  for adjustable rates,  the delinquency rates on prime loans with adjustable rates, grew to be almost  20% was almost as high as the delinquency rate on subprime fixed rate.  so, the united states was not the only place to have a foreclosure crisis, but  it was worse here than in most of the other countries.  here's an example to just look at a few examples of the united states and  few other countries.  now we're just going to look at the percent of loans  that are impaired in some form.  this is similar to the 90 day delinquency rule that we had in the previous picture.  and in the united states, this peaks at just over eight percent in 2009.  other countries on this list are also increased significantly  over the time period and it's really the time series that is most interesting.  so spain goes from zero to approximately 3% and the uk goes just above 2%.  australia and canada do not have a foreclosure crisis.  canada in particular is often held up as an example of a set of  policies that can prevent having a significant housing crisis.  here, what we're going to see is though, that the united states is not alone,  and in fact, we would see other countries in europe,  particularly ireland, a similar housing crisis playing out.  [music] 
[music]  let's first discuss some notable events that happened in the first  eight months of 2007.  so this is really where the sub-prime crisis started to roll forward.  we really learned for sure,  publicly that the subprime housing market was gonna have some significant trouble.  first, new century, which is a real estate investment trust had a market cap  of approximately 1.75 billion at the beginning of the year,  was delisted on march 13th, and then on april 2nd, filed for bankruptcy.  so this is a fairly large institution that seemingly could not survive anymore,  because of what was happening in sub-prime markets.  second, the credit rating agencies, which have taken a fair amount of  grief over their overall performance leading up to the crisis,  did by the middle of 2007 see the writing on the wall.  and began downgrading many of the bonds that they had originally rated,  given high ratings early on, when the first came out in 2005 and 2006.  we start seeing some significant downgrades with those bonds beginning on  june 1, 2007 and going really, basically starting then and  going until the fall of lehman brothers.  but it was june 2007 when they first did it.  now as we'll see,  it wasn't the case that the markets didn't already understand this.  so the credit ratings agencies were late.  this kind of a public signal of the type of thing that ends up in the newspaper not  just something that market participants can see.  you'll hear much more about bear stearns in this module and in the next one.  bear stearns was the fifth largest independent investment bank at  the beginning of 2007.  and one of the five, so the fifth of the five,  that was of significant size with hundreds of billions of dollars in assets.  bear stearns had several funds that were part of its asset management  division that were not bear stearns shareholders' money.  but it was rather that bear stearns had acting as an agent,  was investing money for other investors.  and it had two funds specifically that were very,  very active in subprime securities.  these funds ran into a lot of trouble in early june 2007.  they had borrowed up to about $10 billion to make leveraged investments  in subprime securities.  and they were unable to make the payments on all of this borrowing, and  some of their collateral was seized and sold into the market, and  it looked like the funds were going to collapse.  bear stearns, which was the parent, so it's not again bear stearns' own asset,  it was the parent.  bear stearns suspended redemptions in the fund, so it said,  nobody can get their money out of the fund on june 7, 2007.  made loans to the funds and  then eventually liquidated them at the end of july.  effectively they did take this risk back on to their balance sheet and  it was a risk of unknown amounts.  there were loans that had been made, that had been collateralized by  things that were in these funds, that were hedge funds.  and bear stearns now had these risks by the end of july on their balance sheet.  so that's an important thing to keep in mind for later.  as we will see in march of 2008 bear stearns had its own story for  the whole firm.  and the whole firm ended up being purchased,  rescued really by a purchase jp morgan that was supported by the government.  finally moving now from direct subprime to the even  that really kicked off the financial crisis.  so it stops being just a housing crisis and  a subprime crisis and really becomes a financial crisis or  enters what we will call the anxiety period of the financial crisis.  on august 9th, 2007 and this is when bnp paribas,  which is a very, very large north of 1 trillion in assets french bank.  they also had some funds, some funds that they managed for  outside investors and in these funds were subprime securities.  and on august 9th bnp paribas said, we are unable to value  exactly what these subprime securities are worth in our funds.  we don't know.  we, a very sophisticated, huge firm,  is unable to figure out what these subprime securities are worth.  and they suspended redemptions in these funds, because you can't redeem and  give people money back if you can't value what their, what the assets and  the underlying fund are worth.  this as we will see, really was a massive shock to the market.  people started to worry, all market participants started to worry,  if bnp paribas can't figure out what these things are worth,  what hopes do the rest of us have?  [music] 
[music]  the euro is the single currency for 19 countries in europe.  and the eurozone is one part of the overall overall european union.  the european union evolved from previous and  european institutions with a formal name change and major steps towards  union from the maastricht treaty, which took effect in 1993.  the monetary union commenced in 1999, with the euro as an accounting unit.  and was completed with the introduction of physical euros in 2002.  this single currency is managed by the european central bank.  as of january 1, 2015, there were 28 members of the european union,  of which 19 use the euro.  those 19 countries are referred to as the eurozone.  they're also several other countries that are part of the single market  of the european economic area or  that use the euro as their currency without being part of the eu.  this picture gives some sense of the distribution of countries  within the european union and their usage of the euro.  in blue are eurozone countries.  and you can see the big ones that are represented there with just that grey hole  for switzerland, which is not a member of the european union.  in red, towards the top,  the large countries in red are the united kingdom and sweden.  two countries that are full members of the european union, but  have never decided to adopt the euro up to this point.  there are also a few small countries, and you can see the small dots.  these are small countries like andorra or the vatican or monaco that have either  unilaterally adopted the euro or have an agreement with the european union to  use the euro but are not considered formally in the eurozone.  the other eastern european countries shown in red are countries that would  at some point like to adopt the euro, have indicated that they want to adopt the euro  but still need to go through several steps in order to get there.  and finally, the one remaining country of denmark which is in green  is part of a european exchange rate mechanism.  which pegs their currency to the euro.  they could since they've been successful members of that mechanism,  join euro if they chose to.  but they would need to have a referendum.  and the last time they held such a referendum in 2000, it failed.  so what we see is broadly speaking two major parts of the european union.  the part in blue that use the euro as their currency, and  the part in red that either have no plans to adopt it or  are hoping to adopt it once they can satisfy the criteria.  [music] 
[music]  all right. so, we know what safe assets are.  but, why all of the sudden would the demand for safe assets, or  the supply of safe assets change.  that is actually something that happened at a very large scale over the four,  five years that preceded the global financial crisis.  and it's an extremely important part of the story.  and we're gonna look at some data on this today, try to get a sense of that.  starts with just an observation, and  it doesn't have to do with safe assets directly.  and that observation is, between 2003 and 2007, short-term  interest rates in the united states increased by four percentage points.  but longer term tenure interest rates hardly moved.  this is very unusual.  let's see this in a picture.  the left side of the picture shows two lines.  the line that starts high goes low, and  comes back high again is the federal funds rate.  that is a short term interest rate.  that is effectively controlled by the federal reserve,  central bank of the united states.  the blue line that's a little more jagged, and  doesn't have as large moves over the long term, is the ten year treasury rate.  this is a longer term borrowing by the government.  now, the longer term borrowing by the government is, of course, all promised and  guaranteed by the government, so it's very safe.  but, the federal funds rate at almost all times in our history,  the financial crisis will be an exception, is also viewed as a very, very safe rate.  this is borrowing between banks.  but the rate is managed by the federal reserve.  the gap between these two rates is a term spread.  it's the amount that you would need to pay extra, to borrow over ten years  instead of federal funds, which would be borrowing a very short term.  perhaps overnight.  so, what do we see here?  at the beginning of the 21st century,  these two rates are quite similar, and in fact, that's relatively unusual  that these rates are so similar, and there's even a short period of time,  where the short term rate is actually higher than the long term rate.  now, sometimes when short term rates are particularly high,  you will see them be a little bit higher than long term rates,  because people are expecting the short term rates to fall in the future.  and of course, a 10 year rate, is really nothing more than trying to combine  the short term rates over the next 10 years, in some way.  so, if we expect rates to fall a lot.  we could end up with these rates close to each other, or  even the short term rate higher.  in the early part of the 21st century, where we had a relatively mild recession,  the federal reserve was lowering interest rates.  and it falls to it's minimum around 2003.  now, during this time long term rates, didn't move very much, and  it didn't move very much in part because  these changes down were largely expected at some point to be reversed.  but they weren't expected to be reversed immediately, and  they weren't expected to be reversed nearly as sharply.  the expectation of the federal reserve was, when they started to raise interest  rates, which they did following 2003, that this would move the long term rates back  up near the levels they were at the beginning of the 21st century.  so, if you look in 2000, that rate is close to six percent.  by 2003, the long term rate is down near 3%.  despite increasing the short term rates, the federal funds target rate  over the subsequent four years, long term rates only moved up about 1.5%.  not sufficient, to bring them all the way back near the levels they were,  before the federal reserve started dropping rates.  this was a bit of a puzzle, so  let's have that kind of in mind which is that, long term rates  did not move as much as we might have expected from raising the short term rate.  why this matters for creating some kind of a boom,  is related to the credit rates that are then in the economy.  on the right hand graph, we see three lines,  one of which is a derivative of the other two.  the blue line in the middle is the same as what we have have on the left hand graph.  the blue line in the middle is the 10 year treasury rate.  the black line that is above it is the 30-year fixed mortgage rate.  and you can see that these two lines, blue and black move together very closely.  then, that is illustrated by the red line at the bottom,  which has nothing more than the spread between the two of them.  so historically, if you were going for a 30-year mortgage, you would pay between  one and a half and two percentage points more than the ten year government rate.  and that was true over this entire time period.  so therefore, when long rates don't move up.  when the ten year treasury bond does not move up as much as expected,  mortgage rates stay low.  and when mortgage rates stay low, that has a very boomy effect on the housing market.  in an influential speech, before he was chairman of the federal reserve, but while  he was a member of the federal reserve board, a governor of the federal reserve,  ben bernanke proposed that one cause of what he called this conundrum.  was a global savings glut from emerging market and  commodity rich countries that had large current account surpluses.  that is, the rest of the world  really liked buying safe government assets in the united states.  and thus, the demand for those assets was very, very high, and  even though there was a pumping of liquidity into the economy for  some time by the us government, in an attempt to raise interest rates  later to pull out and discourage the credit conditions from getting overheated.  there was still an enormous, enormous demand for  these assets, long term government bond assets from other countries,  that kept effectively the price of those assets high.  and when the price of a bond is high, the return on the bond,  the rate on the bond is low.  and essentially, it was this global savings glut proposed bernanke,  that was keeping the link from between short term and  long term interest rates from being as strong as it had been historically.  next, we'll look at some data on this.  [music] 
[music]  in our module on housing, we talked about the government-sponsored enterprises,  fannie mae and freddie mac,  very large government agencies that were also private corporations.  so it was a strange amalgam, which played an enormous roll in the mortgage markets  leading up to the financial crisis.  let's talk about what happened to them before those crucial months before  the crisis.  as of 2008, fannie and freddie, or we'll just call them the gses,  guaranteed or owned nearly half of the mortgage market.  here's the picture.  in blue is fannie mae's mortgage credit book of business, and  in red is freddie mac's total mortgage portfolio.  they use different terms in their reporting.  but in both cases this represents two important groups, for  each of the institutions.  one is the loans that they have guaranteed.  and you can recall from an earlier module when we talked about housing,  that they will only guarantee loans that meet certain standards,  that are called conforming loans.  during most of this time period, this was loans, mortgages that were $417,000 or  less, and where the borrowers met certain conditions.  they put at least 20% down.  they had a credit score and income documentation that was sufficient.  but these totals also include  portfolio loans that have been purchased by fannie or freddie as investments.  this is where fannie and freddie had their largest role in the subprime market.  they did not guarantee subprime loans, but they did buy many of them.  although their participation in the market stayed roughly between 30 and  40% during this time period.  so they were not a majority of the market, but  they certainly had very large investments in a growing market.  by july of 2008, the gses were clearly in deep trouble.  and on september 7th, the two companies went into government conservatorship.  so the problems in july became clear.  and the treasury secretary at the time, hank paulson,  went to congress, and asked for some additional authority to be  able to take the companies into conservativeship, if necessary.  he was granted that authority, but he did not need to use it until september 7th.  you can see that the markets really understood that fannie and  freddie were in trouble during this time.  and the largest decreases in their stock price came in this middle of 2008 period.  so at the beginning of the year, in blue we see fannie mae's stock price,  which was at about $40 at the beginning of 2008,  and in red we see freddie mac, which is just under $35.  they both fell early in 2008 when it was quite clear  that there were problems in the subprime market.  and they owned a fair amount of subprime.  so at this point it was not just the lower rated tranches, but  rather even the aaa tranches that we knew would have a problem.  and this affected the stock price of freddie and fannie.  it rebounded somewhat in early 2008, around the time of the rescue  of bear stearns, and it wasn't until mid-2008,  may, that really it became clear that the business models that they had were  unsustainable without much more significant government support.  the stock prices dropped both to about $5 by mid july.  the new congressional legislation that came out in july,  that gave the treasury secretary some additional tools to help them,  helped the stock prices rebound a little bit.  but then you can see, by the time we reach early september,  around the time of the conservatorship, the stock price had fallen almost to zero.  it continues to be a puzzle today, years after the crisis,  exactly how freddie mac and fannie mae should be handled by the government.  but it's, in retrospect, quite clear that having government agencies  that had an implicit promise from the government, and the ability to go and  gamble with that implicit promise in their portfolios, is not a good combination.  and, in fact, they ended up taking on far more risk than they could sustain.  the role however, that fannie and freddie played  directly in the cause of the crisis, continues to be a source of debate.  and we discussed with a fair amount of evidence in our module on the housing  crisis, while certainly they are a symptom, and they certainly played  a role in the buildup to the crisis, it is very, very difficult to pin full blame of  the financial crisis, or even a majority of the blame, on freddie and fannie.  in part because their participation in markets and the government participation  in markets, had been very outsized for a very long time.  if anything, it was a model that was flawed that eventually broke during  a global macroeconomic upheaval, caused by the global savings glut,  beginning in the early 2000s.  [music] 
[music]  our next case study is a group of insurance companies that you will often  hear referred to as the monolines, because they have a single type of insurance.  unlike a large diversified insurance company that will offer life insurance,  property and casualty insurance, health insurance,  the monolines had a very very narrow business for most of their existence.  and that narrow business was to insure,  basically to provide credit enhancement to municipal bond offerings.  beginning in the 1970s, what would happen is,  a municipality would wanna have a bond issue.  and the municipality might be a relatively small municipality.  and so what do lenders know about this municipality all over the world?  not very much.  so in order to have a higher credit rating, they would go and they would find  almost like a cosigner on the loan, a cosigner that was an insurance company.  and that insurance company was simply in the business of saying,  we promise to pay if this particular municipality is unable to pay.  we will pay.  and so by doing this, you would get the credit rating if you were actually  lending money to the municipality.  you would get the credit rating that was the higher of the insurance company or  the municipality.  and these insurance companies all had aaa ratings.  this is a nice, quiet, calm business.  this changed a lot in the 2000s.  so during the global savings glut period, when there was an enormous amount of  activity in structured products, structured products being a term for  securitizations and then the extra layers of securitizations that we might see in  cdos, for example.  the monoline insurance companies saw this as an opportunity to expand.  instead of just insuring municipalities, why don't we also provide credit  enhancement for these securitizations, so we get a bundling together of mortgages,  for example, into mortgage-backed securities.  and now to add an extra layer of safety to that, we have an insurance company that  stands behind it and promises, much like the government would promise,  on the agencies, the government-sponsored enterprises,  would promise on conforming loans, the monoline insurance companies would make  those same promises on structured products.  now, this business grew very rapidly.  i mean, monoline insurance companies were not  very well capitalized to be able to do this.  there was a bit of a cognitive dissonance that was going on,  some bubble thinking that was going on in the idea that there was no way that all of  this insurance would get needed at the same time.  as of january 2008, the two largest insurers in this space,  mbia and ambac, had a combined $265 billion in structured product guarantees.  this is a factor of a hundred greater by far,  we are three digits greater in terms of the factor for what their equity was.  they just don't have anywhere near the kind of equity that could support  these guarantees if they're actually called.  but, nevertheless, they maintain during this time their aaa ratings.  starting in the middle of 2007, exactly the same time that it became clear that  even the aaa, and the aaa is where they're doing their guarantees,  the aaa layers of these structured products were themselves in some danger.  the markets became worried about the insurers.  here's a picture that shows us the credit rating for one of the insurers and  the stock prices for three others.  so remember the business that we're in here,  which is originally about guaranteeing municipal bonds.  so ultimately it's a very staid business and one that's necessary for  the normal functioning of the economy that the bond insurers are in, but  now all of a sudden they've started to make guarantees for structure products.  when the market realizes the trouble that they're in, we see the stock prices of  all of these entities that have stock prices falling and  eventually the credit rating for the other falling.  so the top line, the green line, is the credit rating for  fsa, which is one of the companies.  the three other lines are stock price lines for ambac, for  syncora, and for mbia.  and in these lines, what we see is a very very steep drop happening right around  the same time that we have problems in the bear stearns funds,  that we see downgrades of subprime securities, and then accelerating  through the fall until basically the stock prices were very very close to,  were very close to zero for all of these companies.  now, this is gonna turn out to cause problems, as you might expect,  for municipal, for the municipal debt and the municipal borrowers that  were using the bond insurers in the first place to guarantee their debt.  we'll turn to that in the next lesson.  [music] 
[music]  next we turn to the run on repo that i alluded to earlier in this module.  this is where finally the secured lending markets collapse.  what we have seen earlier is that the unsecured markets,  asset-backed commercial paper.  where there is no specific collateral that's been promised as backup, but  rather just a general unsecured lending.  we've seen the collapse happening in the libor or  the unsecured lending between banks.  and we've seen a run arrested only by government action  in money market mutual funds.  which also are unsecured while they are funds,  there's no promises of specific collateral.  in many of the cases as these market collapse, the slack was taken up by repo.  so for asset-backed commercial paper, about $350 billion of  short-term funding ran away from the middle to the end of 2007.  for money market mutual funds, about the same amount order of magnitude.  when you combine these drains with uncertainty about the subprime exposure  on the balance sheets of these financial institutions,  there's massive pressure on repo markets.  if we can no longer borrow through commercial paper,  if we can no longer borrow through interbank markets.  the only thing we can do if we wanna borrow, is to take our collateral and  promise it and get money in return for that.  it's the last thing that you can do to borrow.  so it's like going to the pawnshop as your last resort.  you've tried everything else,  people will no longer hand you money without collateral.  at this point, you have to take your jewelry off and hand it over.  once we see pressure happening in this particular part of the market.  it's really going to be lights out for almost every institution that has been  relying on short-term funding markets to run their business.  we will see this in several different places in the repo market.  we'll see it on spreads, which means, just what's happening to the collateral itself.  collateral that itself, has nothing to do with subprime.  but suddenly nobody wants to own and nobody wants to lend on.  we'll see it happen with the rates, which is  the rate that somebody charges someone to be engaged in repo in the first place.  and we will see it happen finally with haircuts.  with the amount that i'm actually willing or  any counter party is willing to lend to somebody else.  in return for any specific level of collateral.  this picture shows the relationship  between the london interbank offering rate.  the spread between the libor and the overnight index swap,  which is a spread that we've looked at in an earlier module.  to show what the fear level was in interbank markets.  so the libor-ois spread and a collection of non-subprime,  the non-subprime qualifier being important, aaa assets.  during the period from the beginning of 2007 to the end of 2008.  the light blue line, which is the line that starts to dip down at the very end of  the picture, is the libor-ois spread.  and it starts to dip down during these times of heavy government intervention and  rescue for the banking market.  before that dip down, that light blue line is moving very,  very closely with all of the other lines.  the specific movements at different times is less important  than the overall pattern, which statistical analysis confirms.  that the libor-ois moved closely with for example,  aaa asset-backed securities that had been backed by student loans.  or by credit cards, or by auto loans.  these types of asset-backed securities had no direct subprime exposure at all.  but they all shared the characteristic that they sat  on the inventories of large investment banks and other financial institutions.  and they had been financed first by unsecured lending,  until unsecured lending dried up and then by repo.  and as the repo markets came under a lot of pressure,  these are securities that no longer can be financed.  the dealers can no longer hold them in inventory.  what happens to any good that is sitting in inventory that suddenly has to be sold?  we've all seen it driving by stores that are going out of business.  everything must go, 50% off.  what you're seeing here is the manifestation of that happening in these  complex financial markets.  these are fire sales, they can no longer be sitting in inventory,  they need to be sold.  and everybody who could sell them, sold them.  on the left-hand axis are the spreads.  the number of basis points between the overnight index swap and  the returns that you get on these aaa loans.  these types of aaa asset-backed securities  ended up in the long run paying off very well.  they did not have subprime exposure, they were not poorly rated but  they were unable to be held on the portfolios.  and not only are they unable to be held on the portfolios, for  otherwise healthy institutions that did have them.  they were no longer able to borrow the same amounts on them.  because an increase in the spreads was like the increase  in the interest rate on a bond.  it causes the prices of those bonds and the values of those bonds to fall.  a second place to see what the effects were,  are the average haircut on structured debt during this time.  so this includes all of the three-letter acronyms, abs, mbs, cdos, etc.  and it's an average across these different asset classes,  it's one way of seeing the pressure in these markets.  on average, the repo haircut leading up to the middle of 2007 was effectively zero.  you could borrow $100 million and  put up $100 million of collateral, this is in bilateral repo markets.  that begins to climb in mid-2007 and  really explodes by the time we reach the end of 2008.  this average hides some important differences.  a 45% average haircut effectively,  what that represents is that in a few of these markets, the haircut was 100%.  nobody would lend you anything with some structured debt as collateral.  and in other cases, the haircut had risen significantly.  this is effectively a withdrawal from a bank, so  instead of getting $100 million of cash on my $100 million of bonds.  i'm now getting $55 million of cash, the average haircut is $45 million.  and the value of the bonds themselves have fallen, so i'm receiving  a 45% haircut on a bond that has a much lower value than it had in the beginning.  that's just like a run on a bank.  a paper that i wrote with my yale colleague gary gorton confirms that  the pictures that you just saw actually hold up in a statistical relationship.  that is, that the relationship between the libor-ois spread and the additional  spreads on asset-backed securities in fact, is a tight relationship.  even for the securities that have absolutely no subprime exposure.  furthermore, the main driver of haircuts,  what we saw in the previous picture, that rise from 0% to 45%.  is not so much what's happening in the interbank markets, but  rather uncertainty about the future spreads on that collateral.  which of course are related to the interbank markets.  that is, if you're putting up collateral to me and you're asking for money and  i'm trying to figure out what should the proper haircut be on that collateral.  if i'm worried that perhaps the collateral that you're offering me  might fall in value over the next few days.  i'm gonna ask for a bigger cushion and in fact, that's what the evidence shows.  so putting that all together, as uncertainty rises in these markets and  as the interbank fear index of the libor-ois go up.  we see pressure on the last place that people can borrow,  that institutions can borrow.  which is the secured funding markets or the repo markets.  [music] 
[music]  the stress test was a key part of our strategy.  one of the most effective things we did.  so one i wanna explain why it worked,  how it worked and why it ultimately had such positive effect.  the financial system in the early part of '09, again despite all  the capital injections, despite the guarantees, was still viewed as insolvent.  still viewed as needing trillions of dollars of additional capital.  people had no way of judging who was weak.  they had no way of judging how much additional capital might be needed for  each individual firm.  that was in part because we didn't know how deep the crisis was going to be.  they didn't know how far the economy was gonna fall.  so that froze everything, and it meant the banks were still on retreat,  trying to protect themselves, sucking a lot of oxygen from the american economy.  so, what we did, is we designed this thing we called the stress test,  drawing on some earlier supervisory work.  and what we did, is we had the fed estimate the scale of losses  that firms might face in the event of a terrible,  much more damaging, much more prolonged recession.  and then said we would disclose those losses,  that we'd disclose those losses for each individual firm.  and we committed to make sure that those firms had more capital,  had enough capital to survive losses that large.  we'd give them a window to go raise capital from the private markets.  and if they were unable to raise that capital successfully, we'd put additional  capital in using the emergency resources that congress had given us.  so this was a way to help the markets distinguish between the relatively weak  and the relatively strong is a way to maximize the chance that we use  private resources from vessels around the world to be capitalizing systems.  so that not too much of a burden fell on the american tax buyer.  and it's a way to help recapitalize our system as quickly as possible.  so banks could be a source of strength,  not a source of weakness to the economy going forward.  and the reason why it was successful was because the fed in designing  the stress test imposed a set of loss estimates that were greater.  represented by that dotted line across that graph,  greater than the peak of the great depression.  so that helped reassure people that we were gonna make sure there was enough  capital in the system.  so that the system could survive a very catastrophic economic outcome.  and so it worked and it was judged credible because the loss estimates  were severe, they were dramatic, they were intense.  but also because in the same context we were more  successful in convincing people that this mix of guarantees.  and other protections we've provided the system were fully credible,  we really meant it.  we weren't gonna allow any more messy failures in our system.  and they were successful in part because monetary policy and  fiscal policy at that point were acting much more aggressively  to help offset the collapse in private demand.  and they worked in part because at that point the world had immobilized together  a much more dramatic forceful response to the crisis.  so that whole set of policies helped reduce the risk of a great depression help  reduce the incentive for  people to behave as if we were gonna face the great depression.  that helped bring a little measure of stability.  and the stress test in that context reinforced the broader traction  provided by those policies in the following sense.  by demonstrating that there was gonna be enough capital in the american financial  system for  the system to survive losses like you might face in the great depression.  we helped make the great depression less likely.  and another way to say it, we helped put enough money in the window to make  the response more credible relative to the scale of potential losses,  relative to the scale of potential pressures in the system.  so if you look, you can see, as the broader framework and  policy was put in place, people could see it.  get a better feel for it.  its magnitude.  its force.  and as we started to reveal the stress test design parameters, and  release the results.  we broke the panic and what this chart shows is the rise in  the markets of the property default by the major us banking institutions.  so you can see them rising to catastrophic levels.  and then coming down very, very quickly as these broader set of measures  help produce more confidence, help get more traction.  so i want to just summarize in broader arc the scale of what we did,  how you should think about what we did in this crisis.  at the beginning we escalated very slowly, and very messily.  in ways that was hard for the market to understand the credibility and  scope and parameters of the protections we provided.  but as the panic intensified, we ultimately moved to overwhelming force.  went to congress to get much more dramatic authority and  try to use that authority much more aggressively and creatively.  that wasn't enough though,  because it was late to prevent pretty massive damage to the american economy.  and although it felt like a long time at the time, as we're it it.  seeing the fires burn around us.  ultimately when those policies got traction.  things turned very, very quickly.  so the economy went from shrinking at an annual rate of about 8% a year in the fall  of in the latter last quarter of 08 to growing again in six months.  and you can see from those earlier charts how quick the fires of the crisis receded,  the panic faded, and the system looked more stable.  and this happened, because in many ways, we did the opposite  of what governments had typically done across financial crisis.  and a strategy fundamentally different from what governments had deployed in  the great depression.  we avoided the risks, both of what we call sweden.  as a stylized example of a country that was resort,  had to resort to almost comprehensive nationalization of it's banking system.  we also avoided the broader risks of what people came to call japan,  which is a much more tentative gradual drawn out response.  ultimately it took japan about three times before they found the mix of policies  were ultimately very, very successful in helping fundamentally resolve and  faith in their financial system.  [music] 
[music]  we will talk more about the eurozone crisis and  all of its effects that followed upon the recovery  in the united states from the global financial crisis.  we'll talk much more about that in the next module.  but it's good background for this module just to see how the banking crisis,  which was the global financial crisis in the united states, which led to a growth  crisis worldwide, was also connected with the sovereign debt crisis.  these three crises put together  were really what the problem was in the euro zone.  the gfc should be considered as the major economic shock, starts the ball rolling.  but it was the combination of these three interlocking crisis'  in banking sovereign debt and  growth that really caused this continuing crisis that we see in the eurozone.  this graphic from a paper by j shambaugh is  helpful at seeing these interconnections.  in grey are the three key parts interlocking parts of the crisis.  on top is the bank crisis, and that's the way we've been thinking about the global  financial crisis as predominantly a banking crisis thus far in this course.  down to the left of the banking crisis is the sovereign debt crisis  which happened in some of the countries of the eurozone.  and off to the right is a growth in competitive crisis,  which happened in all countries effected by the gfc, but  particularly severely in some of the peripheral countries in the eurozone.  let's look at how these three crises are interlocking.  a banking crisis creates banking failures, that's on the top left corner.  and too many banking failures will themselves  bankrupt sovereigns as they try to support banks.  we will talk about that today as the predominant reason why the irish  economy got into trouble.  which is sovereigns or  countries governments trying help their banks in being unable to do so.  so that ultimately it's not just the banks that are failing but the country itself.  when a country has a debt crisis that country will default or  need to have it's debt restructured.  and as it turns out, as you might expect, much of that sovereign debt is  held by banks in that same country, or in closely related countries.  so banks that are attempting to get held up by their sovereigns, were unable  to hold up the banks, lead to a bit of a cascading failure between the two.  the sovereign debt crisis also has a direct effect, or rather, an effect that  goes through one step on growth and competitiveness in its countries.  and that happens predominantly because of austerity.  austerity is when a government attempts to raise more taxes or  cut its spending in response to having a large deficit due to,  in this particular case, the need to support its banks.  the austerity measures that are imposed  are an attempt to relieve that sovereign stress.  but nevertheless, through fairly straightforward ad standard  aggregate demand tansient types effects when governments spend less and  tax more in the short run at least that harms the economy.  when the economy grows more slowly that weak growth, the arrow  heads back from growth and competitiveness to a sovereign debt crisis.  and that weak growth will make those certain indebted sovereigns  in more trouble, oftentimes insolvent.  because afterall if you're a country and you are trying to balance your budget,  prominent way that you're gonna want to do that is through higher taxes and  lower spending.  but when your economy is weak you need to spend more spending on the safety net and  your taxes are lower simply because your economy is growing more slowly.  growth and competitiveness also interact with the banking crisis.  a weak economy and failing asset crisis damage, further damage in this case,  the balance sheets of banks, further weakening the banks.  when banks are weak and feel that they do not have sufficient capital,  they pull back on their balance sheets.  that's that up at the very top right, weak banks slow growth through reduced lending.  this is called the banking channel or the credit channel.  if banks don't have money and banks feel that they are near to bankruptcy  then they pull back on lending and in the absence of having any lending,  sometimes even good business projects are unable to be funded.  in this way we see how these three different crises are all interrelated.  and what happened in the eurozone to make it different than the united states,  is that the united states never had a sovereign debt crisis.  if you take that one piece out, you have less need for austerity.  in the united states, they were able to have a very,  very large stimulus program which helps significantly in the recovery. 
[music]  now let's turn our focus back specifically to the global financial crisis period of  2007 to 2009.  we will return, in the next module,  to the eurozone crisis and the double dip recession that happened afterwards.  but now, we're gonna focus our attention on that same time period that we've  already looked at so closely in the united states.  the root causes of the crisis in europe were much the same as they  were in the united states.  in our globalized world, everybody played the same game.  very excessive lending, in some countries that led to a housing bubble.  in other countries, it just led to very, very fast expansion of credit,  on the part of banks.  but it's important to note that the worst manifestations of the crises,  whether they were in banking, or sovereign debt, or  in growth, different across the countries of europe.  the timeline for  the european crisis is a mirror of what was going on in the united states.  in fact, the events that happened in europe were often the very first of  the panicky types of events that happened overall, worldwide.  we've talked, in an earlier module, about the important event at bnp paribas,  the large french bank, on august 9, 2007,  when the bank said, we don't know how to price some of these securities that  are in some of our investment portfolios, some of these subprime related securities.  and that really was the beginning of certainly,  the anxiety period of the global financial crisis.  followed shortly thereafter in the united states by the runs  on the asset-backed commercial paper market.  northern rock, the large united kingdom bank in the northeast of england,  that we discussed in an earlier module,  was the first bank casualty of the global financial crises,  with runs that extended into their retail branches on september 14, 2007.  european countries tried a variety of different actions in order to respond to  the global financial crisis.  iin fact, different countries in europe can often be thought of as laboratories  for where the best ideas came out worldwide.  on october 8th, the united kingdom announced a bank rescue package,  which turned out to be a model for what was later done in the united states.  there are several different pieces.  the first was a bank of england special liquidity scheme.  the word scheme in the united states has negative connotations.  but it does not have negative connotations in britain,  where the word simple refers to a plan, and in this case,  an effective plan, $200 billion to provide liquidity to banks.  there is bank recapitalization fund, which was authorized up to 50 billion pounds.  a guarantee of interbank lending of 250 billion pounds.  and then, a similar combination of lending capital and  guarantees was followed by other countries in the eurozone, with commitments,  all grand total of $1.3 trillion euros on october 13th.  that included germany, $500 billion euros, france,  $360 billion, spain $100 billion, which added to $50 billion already committed,  austria $85 billion and the netherlands $200 billion.  collectively, between the uk and europe,  the combination was nearly $2 trillion.  here you can see, the amounts of aid to financial institutions by member state,  now given in billions of euros for the united kingdom and  the other countries in europe.  the dark green shaded is the amount of aid that was actually used and  the light green is aid that was approved.  the largest supplier of aid overall was the united kingdom,  which incidentally has had the strongest recovery since the gfc of these countries.  next, was germany, 646 billion euros, followed by denmark,  spain, ireland, and france.  altogether, the european countries dedicated an enormous amount of aid  towards their banking sectors during the global financial crisis.  the challenge, of course, is that some of these sovereigns really did not  have the capacity to provide such aid and that's the problem that will occur later.  spain and ireland, for example, which were fairly aggressive in their responses and  which were countries that both had very large housing bubbles leading up  to the crisis, really lacked completely the capacity to  be able to support their banks.  in ireland's case, to quite severe consequences that followed shortly.  [music] 
[sound] >> okay,  i want to talk about one of the most important, one of the hardest things to do  in a crisis which is how to conduct a triage in a panic.  how do you decide which firms to save and which were allowed to fail.  how do you decide who's more likely to be solvent,  who's more likely to be insolvent.  how should you balance concerns about moral hazard with the risk you take in  allowing failure in accelerating a run in the financial system.  when should you impose haircuts on creditors and  when should you guarantee them and protect them?  in a period of four weeks in september 2008, the united states put fannie and  freddie into conservatorship, guaranteeing their creditors.  helped encourage the acquisition of a failing investment bank, merrill lynch,  by a bank, bank of america, tried but  failed to find a buyer for lehman, leading to its bankruptcy.  acted to prevent the failure of a large global insurance company, aig, and  imposed loses on the creditors of a major bank, wamu,  in the context of facilitating its merger, its acquisition by jp morgan.  the pressures that brought all these firms to the brink of collapse were a symptom of  the force of the broader crisis.  a symptom of the pressures washing across the global financial system.  but the losses imposed in the creditors of lehman were devastating.  they were like adding fuel to the fire, and  they dramatically accelerated the panic.  why was this such a disparate, inconsistent,  seemingly erratic response to the crisis?  was it fog of war, uncertainty about what was happening?  was it concern about moral hazard?  was it a lack of appreciation for the fragility of the system?  was it concern about political opposition of bailouts?  was it a lack knowledge or lack of creativity in finding better solutions?  mostly, it was a reflection of the limits of the authority we had.  we went into this crisis, the world's largest most important financial system,  with deeply inadequate, antiquated tools for fighting financial crises.  the fed could not lend to a failing non-bank,  except in very limited circumstances, when it was already past the point of no  return, couldn't borrow from the private markets.  and only when we could be secured to our satisfaction,  meaning only when we had a reasonable prospect that the money we lent extended  would be backed by, instead of assets, it would allow us to be repaid.  we could take risk in doing that, but  we had to have a reasonable assurance that our risks, our exposure would be covered.  so in the absence of a willing buyer, we did not have the ability legally in our  judgement to lend enough money to lehman brothers to prevent it from collapse.  because lehman brothers was sufficiently weak,  there was not enough value we could lend against.  the scale of losses they already had were so large that we didn't believe we could  meet the legal test of lending to them on a scale that would prevent collapse.  the only option we face, we had was the option we deployed successfully in  the context of bear stearns and jp morgan.  we tried to find a willing buyer that would take on most of the risk, but  we were unsuccessful in doing that.  and again in part because was so large and  so weak but also because the financial system was so fragile at that time.  in case of the aig in contrast, aig had a set of very valuable, very substantial  businesses around the world that were generating a lot of income.  and in that context,  we felt that we could lend against those businesses on a scale large enough to give  them the resources they needed to avoid failure, avoid default.  after lehman, the crisis accelerated dramatically.  and the losses imposed on the money market fund caused it to break the buck for  the first time in history and that accelerated the panic.  and that brought a bunch of other institutions to the edge of collapse.  and the first one at the edge of the abyss was washington mutual.  the fdic, in contrast to the authority the fed had, did have substantial authority to  guarantee in extremis the creditors of a failing bank and the bank holding company.  but in the case of washington mutual and  acting to facilitate its merger with jp morgan.  the fdic decided, because of concerns about moral hazard and  the risk of losses to its deposit insurance fund,  to impose losses on some of the creditors of wamu itself.  relieving jp morgan of the need to assume those obligations.  and that action, that choice, that was a choice,  not to use authority that the fdic had been given was very consequential.  because it helped spread the crisis, accelerate the crisis from what  was then mostly a crisis affecting the non-bank financial systems,  investment banks for example.  to the core of the banking system, making it much,  much more dangerous to the american economy.  to its credit, the fdic recognized this very quickly and  reversed course in the context of the next problem it had to confront in wachovia.  and then several weeks later, when after the tarp passed the congress, it agreed to  provide a mechanism to guarantee new borrowing by bank holding companies.  an action that was just critical and decisive to helping break the panic.  but the lesson you should take from this is that if you have got creditors in  the system at crisis, you gonna do terrible damage.  and to correct that damage, to offset that damage,  it's gonna take far more force, policy force, financial force.  far more, you have to take far more risks than you hoped you were gonna have to take  in order to protect the economy from falling into a greater depression.  it's another example of the basic paradox at work when you make these choices,  that what seems sensible in a normal crisis is dangerous in a systemic crisis.  at what seems fair and sensible from a moral hazard perspective or  just being careful about how much risk you have exposed the taxpayers to  can be deeply responsible and much more costly.  ultimately forcing you to take on much more risk to protect the economy.  [music] 
[music]  we left a lot of things undone in the crisis and the reforms.  i want to just highlight some of the scars of the crisis for  the economy and some of the unfinished business that we left undone.  we are still going to face going ahead.  just to repeat again that crisis caused very substantial economic damage,  very substantial loss of income and wealth.  and although unemployment rates have come  down quite a bit the broadest measures are still pretty high.  the people living in poverty in the united states  increased dramatically in the crisis.  and has come down only very little in the early stage of recovery.  we left the housing finance system fundamentally broken still,  very dependant on the government.  without a framework of policies yet  in place to reduce the government's role back to a more tolerable normal position.  we weakened dramatically the firefighting authorities of  the united states as a whole, both the fed's, the fdic's and the treasury's.  a financial crises unlike national security we don't invest the head of state  with break-the-glass authority to protect the economy from the cataclysmic threat.  and that's a consequential choice and leaves us at risk of a later,  less powerful, less effective response in the face of the inevitable future crisis.  we have a terribly fragmented regulatory system.  it was true before the crisis.  it's true after the crisis.  we consolidated authority in the consumer financial protection bureau and  on consumer protection which i think is a very good thing for  creating a little bit better body for coordination.  fundamentally we left in place, we limited we left in place a very complicated  oversight system and that has costs.  it means that there is too much opportunity for arbitrage, for  people to take advantage of capital regimes for example.  it means that the system is slower to adapt, less agile  in trying to get ahead of or stay abreast of, not get too far behind emerging risks.  there's much more complexity in rules than would be ideal, there's much less  accountability for outcomes, because responsibility is so diffuse, and it means  that i think there's less protection, less defense against regulatory capture.  lots of better models for a streamlined,  simpler system that the u.s. could look at from around the world,  but i think ideally, you'd want to look at something like this.  you'd want there to be a comprehensive,  accountable authority for everything systemic.  you'd want to have broad resolution authority to deal with inevitable failure.  you'd want to have integrated authority to look at investor protection type issues,  consumer protection and housing finance.  hard to make it more simple than that.  [music] 
[music]  part of what determines how dangerous crises are is what policy makers do and  are able to do in response to that.  why not talk about some of the most important dimensions of financial capacity  that again are ultimately critical in determining how bad these things have to  be or how bad these things can be.  this is a picture, of a bank in china in 2014  that was experiencing a classic run.  i think it was a, sort of a slow walk at that time.  people were concerned the bank was not stable.  and what this bank did which is the typical response in financial panics,  is to stack a bunch of money in the window.  to try to illustrate to the depositors they didn't need to rush to withdraw their  funds because there is plenty of money there for them.  and this is important because you if you want to think about how you break panics.  and how you reduce the risk that panics end in terrible damage to economies.  you have to figure out a way to build a firewall to put enough  money in the window.  so that people don't have the incentive to run,  to rush to protect themselves individually.  but what determines a countries ability to do that?  that's determined by a bunch of things that are dimensions of financial capacity.  this is a picture that shows the decline and then the gentle rise in the level  of public debt in the united states, as a share of the economy over time.  and you can see, in the decade before the crisis,  the level of borrowing to gdp rose modestly.  that came down as a result of a bunch of fiscal rumors in the united states,  then it started to rise a bit.  but by the early stage of the crisis,  a modest surplus in the budget turned into a deep deficit.  this is important to note because your degrees of freedom,  your ability to act to protect people in a crisis depends a lot on whether you have  the ability to mobilize resources quickly in response to the potential losses.  another thing that is important to the degrees of freedom governments and  central bank have is what's the central bank's credibility?  how confident are people that the central bank is a prudent  manager about the risk of inflation.  and the us went into the crisis with a high degree of central bank credibility.  the central bank had delivered a long period of relatively low and  stable inflation.  another dimension of capacity is how large is your financial system relative to  the size of your economy?  and the us had a relatively small banking system as a share of our economy.  you can see on that list of financial systems  that banks as a share of our economy were at the lower end of size.  and that matters a lot too because you wanna think about the resources you have  against the potential risk of loss in banks.  you think about the challenge of stabilizing a failing financial system,  it depends on how large is that system relative to the scale of your resources.  those were a few things about the degrees of freedom we had  that related to our financial strength.  but part of our degrees of freedom related to the authority we had and  we went into this crisis with very weak, very inadequate financial authority.  fire fighting authority, relative to the system, and relative to the challenge,  and relative to the crisis.  so we had no standing authority at the treasury, the ffed,  or the fdic to inject capital into weak banks.  the fdic had lots of ability to wind down a failing bank safely, but no,  or a very weak authority to wind down the kind of complicated bank,  or investment bank institutions that were the center of this crisis.  the fed had a standing authority like all central banks  in the discount window to lend money, to commercial banks.  and the fdic and the treasury had some emergency authority.  the fdic had deposit insurance,  could guarantee deposits against losses up to $100,000.  but it didn't have authority to guarantee or had not used authority to guarantee  other source of funding that are critical to banks and bank holding companies.  it has this emergency authority that was called the systemic risk exception,  used very rarely.  and treasury had a tool called the exchange stabilization fund  that had i think never been used in the context of an american financial crisis.  it had only been used to help mitigate the risks of emerging market financial crises.  these tools were very weak and very inadequate to  the nature of the risk we faced in the us financial system on the eve of the crisis.  here's a way to illustrate it.  this is a stylized representation of the scale of the financial system.  and you can see, in the box in green, the scope of deposit insurance.  and you can see a sort of softer, more implicit sense of support for  the other source of fundings that banks rely on.  but the rest of the american financial system,  depicted in red, was outside the scope of those basic safeguards.  those basic safeguards we put in place after the great depression,  to reduce the risk of financial crises.  so, what that meant is that the vast bulk, or the substantial majority, of credit, or  risk, or financial activity that's relevant to how the economy functions  in other institutions in the funding markets.  were left outside of the types of safeguards available to central banks and  governments to mitigate the risks of runs and panics.  so just to emphasize it, on the eve of this crisis,  our financial capacity as a country was very, very strong.  but our tools, our fire-fighting authority,  our emergency authority were very weak and very inadequate.  and that added up to being very important to the degrees of freedom we  had into the choices we made.  and that in turn was critical to the magnitude of the damage caused by  this crisis.  [music] 
[music]  popular and academic explanations of the causes of the housing crisis focus on  three main hypotheses, and we will talk in this module at length about the evidence  for these three hypotheses.  the first goes under a variety of names.  bad behavior or moral hazard, the more technical term for  essentially bad behavior or  popularized by an academy award winning movie was an inside job.  so these are things that is effectively the behavior of individuals acting in  their own interests ignoring what would happen to the rest of the world by acting  in their own interests.  that effectively caused the housing crisis.  the second would be that it was government failure.  so you'll hear this explanation often from  people who look at the large amount of government activity in housing markets,  who believe that effectively that was the cause.  that it was the government's enormous activity in housing markets and  their failure to do it properly.  finally, you'll hear the word bubble and a bubble is a term that been around  in economic for hundreds of years to describe an asset bubble.  or if you think about how the price might look as it rises and then falls.  it goes up and then it goes down looking like there's a bubble on the page.  that's how i always remember what a bubble is, and bubble thinking refers to people  looking at housing thinking, oh this is just going to keep going up forever.  i don't have to worry about it.  until of course it finally falls down, so people somehow are getting it wrong and  they're getting it wrong in a very specific way.  so these three different hypotheses are not mutually exclusive.  you can certainly have all three going on at the same time, but we'd like to have  an idea, especially if we would like to not have more crisis in the future.  which of these three hypotheses have the strongest evidence?  and this module's not a mystery novel.  so i will tell you right at the outset that the evidence really for  hypothesis one and two is weak.  and the evidence for hypothesis three is much stronger.  and we'll see that when we go through that evidence today.  [music] 
[music]  what causes financial crises?  financial systems themselves are inherently fragile.  financial distress in the financial system can cause severe damage to the real  economy, and policy makers often mismanage the response.  so let's start with a little bit about the basic structure of financial systems.  financial systems as you all know,  they play this critical function in the economy.  they take the savings of savers and loan or  invest those recourses in activity that has some positive return.  people lend them that money for a very short period,  they expect it to be available on demand.  and banks and other firms take those resources and  lend them for longer periods of time to support people who wanna borrow  to finance the purchase of a home or a business, that wanna build a new factory.  that's the basic function of the financial system.  the structure of a typical bank,  which is described here, has this thin base of common equity.  a set of other forms of borrowing, long and short, deposits, secured, unsecured.  and those finance the assets which are depicted on the left.  this basic structure, by design, is fundamentally fragile  because that equity cushion is thin and a large share of the remaining  source of funds used to finance the loans of the assets of the institution  can run, can be withdrawn in a crisis.  and a bank doesn't have the ability to sell assets quickly  to meet a withdrawal of funds in extremis,  thus, the inherent fragility of a financial system.  and i wanna show just a little illustration, so  i'm gonna pause one second and i'm gonna show you just a little illustration about  how to think about why to try to illustrate this basic point.  so you wanna think about banks as inherently tippy.  so a modest shock creates a risk that they can tip over,  and if you think about a system as a bunch of linked banks,  you see the obvious risk of them tipping over.  ideally, you want banks to look more like this with this more stable foundation.  but the dilemma is people who trust their savings to a bank or lend money to a bank,  it's hard for them to tell whether the bank is stable like this or  whether the bank's vulnerable like this.  particularly hard to tell in the midst of a deep recession  when the entire system's exposed to losses and  everybody's worried about the risks that they might lose their money.  so in a crisis, even banks that have this greater fundamental  foundation of stability, they look like this, they look vulnerable.  here's a small illustration,  a simple illustration of the difference between a bank that has a more stable  base of capital, or more conservative funding structure, and one that doesn't.  that narrower base signifies a greater vulnerability to shocks,  greater fragility.  now this matters in part because the financial system is so  closely linked with the rest of the economy.  it's like the power grid in the economy.  if the lights go out, the power system fails, it's very hard for  the rest of the economy to function.  one way to illustrate this linkage is by showing the way this basic dynamic works.  so let's think about it, just move through the cycle described here.  so economic growth slows because of some adverse shock, the economy slows.  that creates the fear of loses.  depositors start to withdraw their funds from  what they perceive to be the weaker institutions.  those institutions try to sell assets or withdraw loans,  call funding, to meet the demand for withdrawals of funds.  that pushes down asset prices, the price of financial securities.  in response to that, banks lend less.  they pull back.  that reinforces, intensifies the slowdown of the economy.  that makes more institutions look weaker.  the cycle continues.  it's a classic, vicious,  self-reinforcing cycle in the context of financial distress.  third thing that matters is the response of policy makers to that shock or  that distress.  and as that earlier chart shows, policy makers tend to mismanage the response.  in fact, often the initial response, the initial inclination of policy makers  is to do things that makes the crisis worse.  why is that, or how does that manifest?  sometimes, it's just because policy makers just react too slowly, it's hard for  them to appreciate the magnitude of the crisis.  sometimes, it's because they're understandably concerned about  moral hazard, about the effects on incentives about acting too aggressively.  sometimes it's because of a basic conservatism in policy,  people think it's better to move slowly, you take less risk in doing that.  sometimes its because of a basic lack of knowledge among policy makers about  what works, about what makes sense.  because again, it's quite rare that the very severe crisis,  the classic panic, happens to the same country in a short period of time.  usually these things are separated by long lags.  [music] 
[music]  there's lot's of causes of financial crises,  lot's of things contribute to the risk of financial crises.  in the classic, severe financial crisis,  you can usually find evidence to support any view have about what really matters.  sometimes low interest rates are a contributing factor.  sometimes you see a huge amount of fraud and  predation, which might increase the basic preconditions [inaudible] the crisis.  there's huge diverse mix of incentive problems in financial systems.  moral hazard's one of those, the classic concern risk that  people lend to institutions with less sense of risk in doing so,  because they expect to be protected from their losses.  there's lots of evidence of regulatory failure.  regulatory mismanagement in thinking about the risk of crises, cause of crises.  but a fundamental thing is this set of beliefs.  the set of beliefs that can contribute to a long boom in leverage and borrowing.  i want to emphasize and explain the importance of the role beliefs play in  making economies vulnerable to financial crises.  here's just another picture of the kindleberger arc of crisis.  what's interesting about this?  you wanna try to understand what produces that risk of mania.  what produces the conditions that lead to booms, what can you do about those things?  what produces the vulnerability to panic?  how can you break panics?  how can you reduce the risk that panic ends in crash,  ends in economic depressions?  that's the basic craft of how you think about financial crisis management.  in this context, a fundamental thing is to try to distinguish between  what you might call a typical financial shock.  the diverse forms of financial distress that typically happen in  economies from the systemic financial crisis from the classic panic.  again, like we experienced in 2008 and 9.  there's a bunch of factors that distinguish these two types of financial  shocks but a few things matter.  in the systemic financial crisis, you typically had a long rise in debt,  relative to income, a long rise in borrowing relative to income.  typically, that's been financed in forms that are vulnerable to runs and panics.  those two things create a greater risk of contagion across institutions.  that makes the damage to the real economy potentially much, much greater.  and importantly, it makes monetary policy  much less effective in trying to mitigate the economic damage.  because in a situation where people have borrowed a lot and  built up a lot of leverage, behavior is less responsive to the typical  tool central banks have to lower interest rates as the economy weakens.  there's a set of things that help distinguish how things churn out  when a boom or mania tips into a panic or a crash.  i describe three things here.  one is the size and extent of the buildup of vulnerabilities,  that's intuitive and simple.  a second is the tools and financial capacity available to policy makers,  to governments and to central banks to respond.  and a third, is what do they do with that authority?  what do they do with that financial capacity?  what are the choices they make?  how wise and deft are those choices?  again, critical in this context is to recognize that panics are different.  crises that involve runs and  panics are fundamentally different from the typical financial shock.  they're different, in part, because the response required to break a panic,  the response required to protect people, protect the economy from the damage caused  by financial crises is fundamentally different  from the response that's appropriate in the typical financial shock.  in a panic, and this is kinda intuitive to many people, policy has to be  much more aggressive in trying to reduce the risk of damage to the economy.  and the type of strategies you adopt, as i'll describe,  are fundamentally different.  here's a way of thinking how the overlap is sort of limited  between the strategies that work in a major financial crisis and  the strategies that work in the more typical shock,  and the fundamental tension and conflict between those two strategies.  so in response to a typical financial shock, generally,  you want to let failure happen.  you want to haircut the creditors of failing banks,  you want to allow the markets to adjust.  you want to resist the pressure to intervene because it's important and  it's healthy for the economy to go through that adjustment.  for people that took too many risks to bear the full consequences of those risks.  you might let the automatic stabilizers work in fiscal policy, those are things  that automatically provide a little bit of assistance to the economy as growth slows.  the central bank might want to do the normal standard liquidity provision to  market certain institutions, and depending on the nature of,  depth of the recession, the central bank might want to lower interest rates too.  but in a systemic financial crisis,  you have to think about a fundamentally different set of tools.  you have to think about a much more aggressive, much larger fiscal stimulus,  much more aggressive, much less conventional monetary policy response.  in terms of the financial system, you have to err on the side of providing guarantees  and protections to limit the risk of runs, to limit the incentive to run.  and you have to be very, very careful in allowing failure that could spread  contagion, destabilize the rest of the system.  [music] 
[music]  what do we miss and why do we miss it?  here's that long rise in borrowing relative to income.  here's how that borrowing was financed, the dangerous ways it was financed.  largely outside the banking system, not completely but  largely, in forms that we're very vulnerable to runs and to panics.  but why did this happen, why didn't we, why couldn't we do more about it?  why did we allow this system to become so vulnerable to the run, the panic, and  the crash that you saw?  part of the reason is because prior to the crisis, the u.s. financial system  was designed with relatively limited tools to constrain the build up and risk.  the federal reserve and the bank supervisors had tools and  authority to apply capital and liquidity requirements to banks,  and to bank holding companies but those institutions represented only a relatively  small share of the american financial system.  we didn't have the ability to limit leverage in investment banks,  in the government sponsored financial enterprises like fannie and  freddie, in the investment banks and  non-bank financial institutions in some of the big insurance companies.  we couldn't limit the funding risk in those institutions.  we weren't able to limit the risks that were building up in money market funds.  we couldn't set margin requirements in derivatives.  we were not able to limit the amount individuals could borrow relative to  the value of their home.  we had a set of constraints on authority that made it harder  to try to reduce the risk, and  that build up in vulnerabilities had happened in the decades before the crisis.  i want to illustrate a little bit about what happened to the evolution of the u.s.  financial system over this period of time.  if you look at this chart,  it shows in a stylized form, the changing shape of our financial system.  the center represents banks, where we're able  to limit leverage and some of the other risks in banks.  the periphery where the firms are designated in blue,  there were no effective constraints on risk and funding.  look what happens in a system design like that way where you can  have the unregulated, or the less regulated competing, with the regulated.  look what happens when you can only constrain risk taking in part of this  system, in a context where there is this fundamental belief, this confidence,  this exuberance about the stability about the economy and  the prospect of rising asset prices.  if you can string part of the system, a lot of that growth  gets financed in the periphery, where it's less constrained and less regulated.  you can see, over time,  what happened in the american financial system is that the relative importance of  the non-bank financial system, some people call it the shadow financial system.  investment banks, non-bank financial institutions,  fannie, freddie, they all grew in relative importance, over time,  because they were less constrained by the authorities.  it illustrates the fundamental paradox in how you think about prevention.  there's i think a chinese saying about reminding people that  water as it flows down a river, it finds its way around the stones in the river.  risk is like that too in periods of booms.  risk tends to find its way around the constraints.  it tends to migrate where risk is not constrained.  the important thing about this challenge is that the tighter  you set the limits on part of the system, you'll make that part of the system safer.  you could make banks more stable but you'll shrink the market share of banks.  you'll shrink the effective scope of those restrictions over time because over time,  risk will migrate around them, and the relative size of those two  different parts of the system will change in relative importance.  so, what did we do, in the face of this?  we pushed for stronger risk management practices in banks and investment banks.  we made some early efforts to try to introduce more stress testing  to try to get these institutions to think more about the risks of a severe crisis.  we made a major and very successful effort to reduce risk in derivatives.  we worked to limit the provision of leverage by banks to institutions like  hedge funds, concerned by the risks we saw in the ltcm crisis in the late 90s.  but supervision was focused too narrowly on compliance issues,  like in money laundering and  less focused on things about the stability of the entire system on systemic risk.  we didn't raise capital requirements on banks and bank holding companies,  despite these growing risks.  we didn't look for authority from the congress to set limits on capital and  leverage on funding where they did not apply.  we didn't raise down payment requirements on people who were  borrowing to finance the purchase of a house.  we didn't effectively limit risk taking in repo markets, and securities,  finance markets, other markets that were critical to the way the system functioned.  you can think that our biggest mistake, in some sense, was failure in imagination.  we failed to contemplate the possibility that we could face a classic panic and  run like what made the great depression so terrible.  we thought that was inconceivable, unforeseeable, an,  therefore, we didn't build the system to be strong  enough to reduce the risk of that type of classic panic.  [music] 
[music]  okay, i want to talk a little bit about lessons from this crisis.  and i want to start with trying to measure the impact of the strategy we adopted.  so, i'm gonna walk through ten different prisms for looking at impact.  it's important to look at lots of different  ones because we're trying to measure impacting a bunch of different dimensions.  and well i'm gonna try to help solve for  the basic problem which is we don't know what the counterfactual would have been.  and that creates some challenge for judging efficacy of policy.  i just wanna start by making the obvious point that  the economic costs of the crisis were brutal, worst recession,  worst economic outcome since the great depression.  real gdp fell more than 4%.  took us more than three years to return to the pre-crisis level of gdp.  the public debt burden of the country increased dramatically because  of the cost of the recession, increased by i think 30 percentage points of gdp.  most of that was the cyclical effects of the down turn.  at the bottom of the crisis we lost $15 trillion in household wealth.  but again, these costs in our view, and  i think there's a very strong case for this, would have been much  greater in the absence of the measures we ultimately took and put in place.  the damage was terrible in part because of set of policy choices and policy failures.  if you think about failures in policy before the crisis, here's a list of some.  the level of home equity, that basic financial cushion people maintained was  very thin, very small relative to the value of debt people borrowed and  relative of course, to the losses they faced as house prices declined.  the capital cushions in the banking system were too thin.  they were not conservative enough.  but, more important than that,  they were applied much more narrowly than they should've been.  they were applied to just a fraction of the us financial system.  and there was much too much issuance of short term bank,  deposit-like liabilities in the financial system.  these are types of financial commitments, or  financial instruments that look like deposits.  people have this sense they could withdraw on demand at their will for par.  and that itself made the financial system rest on very perilous foundation,  very venerable to runs and panics.  in the crisis we had a bunch of other things,  again mostly because of limits of authority, that exacerbated the damage.  we escalated late.  the crisis got a huge amount of momentum and caused a huge amount of damage before  we were able to muster the authority and the tools to try to break the panic.  fiscal policy also escalated somewhat late, and then it turned contractionary.  it became a drag on growth too early in the recovery.  and as i've just described, the mortgage restructuring process,  the tools we had to restructure the mortgage of the american economy were  very limited without legislation.  and ultimately, therefore we were able to do less than might've been ideal in  helping mitigate some of the damage caused by the housing crisis.  a second way of looking at the impact of the thing we did.  this is a comparison between the size of the shock that hit the american economy in  this crisis versus the size of the shock that hit the american economy in  the great depression.  and the difference in outcomes achieved by the different strategies that we were  employed in that context.  and what you can see from this is that the size of the financial shock measured by  the decline in household wealth was about five times greater at the beginning  of this crisis than it was at the beginning of the great depression.  and yet, the damage to the economy was much more limited.  gdp fell by a fraction, maybe one-fifth of what it did in the great depression.  and the rise in unemployment, although tragic and  terrible, stopped at 10%, double what it was pre-crisis.  whereas, it rose to 25% in the great depression.  a third way of looking at the cause is to compare the outcomes that were achieved  in the united states relative to other countries caught up in this crisis and  past crisis.  so this shows the path of employment  achieved in some of the worst crises of the last century.  whats important to see about this is it's using the us in line is this crisis is  the orange line.  the depth of the decline of the united states was much shallower.  and the pace and timing of the recovery started much earlier,  pace of recovery stronger in many of those cases.  the flat line at the top again is japan, which experiences much  less of a contraction but a much longer period of drift moving sideways.  now, if you compare the outcomes of the united states to the outcomes in most of  the major economies caught up in this crisis, not the crisis of the last  100 years, you can see that the decline in the us was also softer.  us came out earlier, and  the extent of recovery relative to pre-crisis levels, much more dramatic.  part of that is because the initial conditions were different.  part of it's because we had greater degrees of freedom than other countries.  but a lot of it was how we use that freedom.  if you add this line, you can't see the end of it.  that's the great depression line, again.  so these crises, again, much worse than this crisis for most of those economies.  a fourth way of looking at this, financial crises are terrible for the economy,  because credit stops, sucks the oxygen out of the economy.  and although it took some time to get traction, ultimately, and  here's one measure of this, we were able to restart a key part of the credit  markets very successful, very quickly.  this shows the consumer asset-backed securities market,  which stopped functioning in the panic of a wave, was still frozen in early 09.  but we got going again very, very quickly because of the framework we put it place  for to help backstop and support that part of the us financial system.  now this was a terrible crisis, and most people perceived it that way.  and if you look at the credible estimates of independent people of what  the costs of the rescue and what the crisis might be for the united states,  they were catastrophic.  so here's a set of estimates.  if you look at the third one, that's the estimates of the imf in early part of 09,  which said we would lose $2 trillion, spend more than 12% of gdp,  and in stabilizing, re-capitalizing the financial system.  these are the direct costs, estimated direct costs,  of the rescue at a moment when the crisis was most acute.  they're not the costs, the total fiscal costs of the crisis,  the lost revenue, the rise in transfer payments, rise in benefits.  this is just the cost of the financial rescue, so estimates were $2 trillion.  but in the end, the total combined effects cost of the rescue, impact  of the rescue with this the tax payer will earn hundreds of billions of dollars.  again, because of the design of the strategy we adopted,  because of how forceful we were in protecting the system and  getting the economy going again relatively quickly.  so on all the most famous unpopular programs of the time, the taxpayer,  for example, the capital support programs for banks, the guarantees for  banks, interventions in aig and the other big institutions.  and even in fannie and freddie delivered  a very substantial positive return to the taxpayer.  [music] 
[music]  a sixth way of looking at this.  when you intervene massively to protect the system from collapse,  you worry are you gonna sustain the weak?  are you gonna leave this system dependent on emergency relief?  are you locked in with no exit strategy to a long period of support.  and this is a good way of measuring how well we calibrate that risk in this  crisis.  because we are aggressive, look at the steep slope of the initial escalation.  and because of the way we designed the programs,  they were on round stunning rapidly.  and that was in part because we were able to provide this broader framework of  support, catastrophic insurance.  you could say get the entire economy going again quickly.  but it was in part because, these facilities were designed to create  incentives for them to go away, to not be used when conditions stabilized.  so they were designed to be economically compelling in the crisis but  very expensive as soon as you felt some initial return in normality.  so the incentive to use these facilities  as conditions stabilized went away very quickly.  the debate about bailout finish the rescues inevitably was framed as  through the sort of moral prism of what was done for  the average person of main street, versus what was done for the financial system.  it's a very false framework, because of course the only reason you care about  the financial system is because if you let it collapse.  it'll cause a great depression and wreck much greater havoc on the lives and  fortunes of the innocent victims of the average american.  still, it's worth noting what was the scale of direct support through  fiscal policy, fiscal stimulus, tax cuts, unemployment insurance, basic benefits,  support for local governments, infrastructure spending that we delivered  as part of this strategy and it was quite substantial.  not large enough to fully offset the collapse in demand,  not sustained long enough, but still very substantial.  part of it was in the initial stimulus, the american recovery act.  but over the succeeding years, we were successful in getting additional stimulus  on a scale that was roughly equivalent to that legislative and the recovery act.  again, these were very direct things.  very effective, very efficient ways to help.  cushion the effects of a failing economy.  and very powerful,  although not completely proportionate in offsetting the collapse in private demand.  we forced a lot of restructuring of the financial system.  this is a list of the largest financial institutions in the united states  pre-crisis.  and although i think a dominant impression left by the scope of the actions we  took was that we preserved and protected a large portion of those institutions.  in fact, a substantial number of them, the ones that are highlighted in blue still.  no longer exist as independent private entities in the public markets.  there was much more failure and  much more restructuring than even implied by that list.  but even for the largest institutions, there was a fair amount of restructuring.  a ninth prism for looking at the crisis.  to believe the system's safer in the wake of the crisis and the reforms or  is it still as vulnerable and fragile as it was before the crisis.  the system is much safer today by really only any objective measure.  this is just one prism which is the scale of the increase in the capital  requirements for banks.  they're dramatically higher, more conservative.  you remember the stress test figures that show that the loss is imposed.  the estimates for recapitalization that the fed set were set  to cover losses larger than we faced in the great depression.  that framework is a still important input into the capital incentives banks run with  and the requirements themselves are much more dramatic.  but as important, there implied much more broadly,  before the crisis, as you remember, the safeguards were applied only to banks.  in effect, the requirements utternaces were much weaker, much less effective.  but after the reforms, the scope of those requirements, indicated in blue in there,  are much broader.  they cover a much larger swath of the financial system.  and if you think about funding risks as the critical vulnerability in crisis.  the dependence of the system on short term funding,  short term liabilities is much lower today.  this is probably a result of the natural response of fear  after a crisis, but a lot of this is the result of reforms.  people worry, understandably, about the problem of too big to fail and  the moral hazard that results from interventions in a crisis.  but i think by many measures you can argue that too big to fail is less of a problem  today than it was before the crisis.  the largest institutions under the new reforms are subject to  a systemic surcharge on capital, meaning.  they have to hold more capital for a given level of risk,  given dollar of risk, than do a smaller institution.  that's to help them internalize the systemic externalities  that come with their, with weakness and failure.  the fdic has resolution authority that allow them to more safely dismember  a large complicated bank, non-banks, systemic institutions.  there are tougher concentration limits in the u.s.  financial in today than existed before the crisis and the feds.  emergency authority for  reasons i think we'll regret, i'll come back to this, is much more constrained.  the treasury has no more guaranteed authority through the sf  to do with the crisis, and  the fdic's standing authority to guarantee liabilities has been limited.  so because of that the level of implied protection that exists  in the system is also much weaker.  ten and finally, why wasn't the recovery stronger?  you can see that the economy went from shrinking at an annual rate of about eight  or 9%, was recovering in six months, but  the pace of recovery was relatively moderate.  averaged about 2.25 to 2.5%.  job gains in the private sector came pretty quickly.  and they were sustained at a pretty stable pace.  so again, but not that strong after that rapid.  why wasn't the recovery stronger?  there's three primary reasons.  the first is that, is about the natural effects of the leveraging  in a crisis following a financial boom.  people spent a huge amount of time borrowing relative to income.  and you've got a huge buildup in leverage in the financial system.  and a lot of that's gonna finance the construction of new houses and  it takes some time to work those things off and work through those things.  and those things tend to slow in growth.  they're good for the long run.  they make the economy strong in the long run.  they're inevitable.  they're unavoidable.  you want them to happen quickly but  they tend to work against, they're like a head wind to growth.  and that's one reason why the economy was slower than in previous economies.  the second one was the effects of the fiscal policy.  the fiscal policy was very supportive of growth in the peak of the crisis.  but shifted to consolidation relatively early and  became a dragon relatively early.  and the us faced as much of the world, a series of external shocks in those early  years of the crisis from europe, from japan,  a few small oil shocks that cumulatively were a meaningful drag on growth.  so this is a measure of the change in the support of the fiscal  policy over this period of time.  you can see in the shaded line in the middle there,  there was very supportive contribution of growth and then it turned pretty negative.  became a very significant drag again, relatively early in the crisis.  so just to go through these again.  the economic costs were brutal, but  would have been much worse without these set of responses.  we faced a much more damaging, dangerous initial shock but  had much better outcomes than the great depression as terrible as they were.  us came out of this crisis, partly by the strength of our basic financial endowment.  and partly because of the choices we made much faster, much more quickly than  governments that get caught up in this crisis over the last 100 years.  we were able to very quickly get credit markets open again and flowing again,  which is critical to the recovery and growth.  the taxpayer instead of facing losses of $2  trillion in the financial rescue actually made a profit on the interventions.  because they were so aggressive, we were able to unwind the program much more  quickly reducing the risk of a long period of dependence on government support.  we provided a huge amount of direct financial support  to the innocent victims of the crisis across the american economy in tax cuts,  unemployment benefits, basic transfers, support for demand.  we forced a lot of restructuring in the financial system.  we created a much more stable financial system today than it was before the crisis  and growth was weak in part because of unavoidable things.  growth after the crisis was weak partly because of unavoidable things  like the pressures we did leveraging.  partly because things we can't control that came from outside the us but  also partly because fiscal policy turned a little too tight, too quickly.  became a drag on growth earlier.  [music] 
[music]  before we do an entire course on the global financial crisis,  it is useful to define what a financial crisis is,  what a conceptual framework we're thinking about having a financial crisis.  the first thing to recognize, and  it's a starting point for any analysis, is that almost all of the wealth of  the world is embodied in long lived assets that pay off slowly over time.  so we don't really have things that create a lot of value  that are themselves something that create a lot of value very fast.  so, that would be like a house that is going to give you housing services over  a long period of time, a piece of machinery that will produce some good over  a very long period of time, and even human capital that's going to produce services  and other economic value over a long period of time.  some fraction of that wealth however is  needed to back short term safe assets that are used in transactions.  so when you go to the store and you buy something with money nobody is  going to accept here is one one thousandth of my house.  here's a little piece of paper that represents one one-thousandth of my house,  please give me in return what i'm here to buy.  it doesn't work that way.  nor could you ever really transact easily with anyone using claims or  small fractions of claims on these long-lived assets.  we need something that looks like money, something that we can hand over to each  other without having to think about what's actually backing it and know that it's  value is in the par lengths of the united states, a hundred cents on the dollar.  what this means is that, collectively, if we all decided at any point in time that  we're a little nervous about our money, we're not sure what's actually backing  our money, and we want to convert that, all at the same time,  into something that we are sure about, well that's all these long lived assets.  it's not going to be something that as a world  is going to have this nice transaction feature to it.  so if we take all our money and we say give me the claims,  the claims on the houses, the claims on the human capital,  which is the future taxation of the government,  the claims on and factories, we won't then be able to go around and transact.  our ability to transact with each other rests on the confidence that we have that  some fraction of our wealth is safe and can be embodied in these green pieces  of paper, or in checking accounts, or in other safe assets that we use to transact.  a panic happens when enough people get nervous about whether or not their  money is safe and they try to convert it to something that they're sure about.  in the old days, that would be gold, these days it might be government bonds or  it might be claims on real estate right away,  any type of claim that they can be 100% sure about.  that's a panic.  that's in the old days where you would see people running to their banks to take  their money out, or  rather, in the very old days, to take out gold in stead of money.  a financial crisis happens when a panic or  a fear of the panic effects the overall functioning of the financial system.  so the panic by itself is not meaning that people can't go to work or  that people can't get investment in order to express their business, but  if the panic happens and drains banks and  other financial institution's other ability to do any lending,  then all of a sudden this can have an effect on the real economy.  so this is a separation.  the panic is the event whereby we lose confidence in our ability to  transform long-lived assets into money type substitutes, and  a financial crisis is the reaction to that.  either that thing happening itself or just banks fearing that it's  going to happen and pulling back on lending in advance.  [music] 
[music]  this is a talk about how to fight financial crisis.  it's about the cause and the craft of fighting financial crisis.  it's important, of course, because they're devastatingly damaging.  they cause lots of damage.  they happen around the world.  they happen with pretty appalling frequency.  and the craft of what you do about them is very underdeveloped,  certainly relative to magnitude of the cost and the damage they impose.  so why is this important and why do we do this so badly?  as i said these things happen around the world with pretty appalling frequency.  i'm gonna show you a little map of how these happen over time.  this map shows a century of financial crisis.  and if you watch it, you watch it carefully,  you'll see that they happen obviously to different countries over time.  and the map distinguishes between the relatively modest crisis and the acute  systemic crisis, like the crisis of the great depression or the crisis of 08, 09.  so watch, as you look at it watch the frequency by country,  cuz you'll see something really important,  which is it's not just that these happen all the time around the world.  the really severe ones happen to your country, to the same country very rarely.  and that happens to be fundamental to why these things end up to being so  damaging and why they are sort of so hard to manage.  these scenes of devastating human costs in the middle of our  panic in the fall of away when things are falling apart around us.  we were having a debate about whether we should go  to congress to get more authority to fight the fire.  and we're sitting in my office, the new york fed, around a conference table on  a speaker phone with the secretary of the treasury and  the chairman of the federal reserve.  and we're debating.  we were trying to make the case.  it was time to go to congress to get authority.  cuz the fed was out of ammunition and one of my colleagues, meg mcconnell,  from the new york feds said at that point.  she put the speaker phone on mute, and she said,  tell the secretary of the treasury that if you don't get the authority now,  we're gonna have shanty towns and bed lines across the country.  so here's a little picture of the devastation from the great depression.  in the average,  the great depression took ten years to get back to the pre-crisis levels of output.  in the typical, in the systemic banking crisis,  sometimes it takes longer than that.  and in two thirds of the major systemic crisis in the last century,  unemployment never returns to the pre-crisis level.  so these things are just terrible.  this is a picture of bank runs in the great depression, and  here's a picture of the shanty towns that meg worried about,  meg warned about bread lines, soup lines.  so another way to look at the cost is just look at the effects of the fall in  employment across countries.  these pictures show the crisis in the big five economies over the last century.  so you can see the great depression is the u.s. line,  you can see sweden, which is a longer more damaging path.  and you can see japan which is shallower losses but  extended over a much longer period of time.  here's two other scandinavian countries, or nordic countries,  also against the great depression.  and here is a picture of the u.s.  against spain in their major crisis, before the european crisis, more recently.  ken rogoff and carmen reinhart have written that in this history of financial  crisis, this tragic history of financial crisis, unemployment  typically rises seven percentage points over five years of job losses.  output typically falls more than 9% of gdp during two years of the decline.  government debt almost doubles.  house prices fall by about a third.  equity prices fall by about half.  and this is important,  the direct fiscal costs of the financial rescues typically exceed 10% of gdp.  steven pinker is famous for describing or showing how the incidence of death  by homicide and war has declined dramatically over the period you see.  if you look at the picture on the right in contrast,  we're not getting better at limiting the losses and financial crises.  stark contrasts between, lots of areas where you can see  measurable progress in the long arc of history in reducing incidence of disease.  but again look at the contrasting record in financial crises.  so we should be able to do better.  these lectures are divided into three parts.  the first is about the common causes of financial crises.  then second is about the financial crisis of 08 and 09, what we did,  and the strategy we adopted, what we achieved with that strategy.  what we missed, what we got wrong, what challenges still remain.  and the third is about how to think about what we learned from this crisis and  what that should tell us of how we respond to future crises.  i wanna start with this quote by hyman minsky,  the economist who said in talking about what produces this risk  of financial crisis, he said stability breeds instability.  his basic point is it take s long period of relatively stable outcomes  to produce the conditions that make you vulnerable to crisis.  and i'll explain a little bit of the intuition behind that using the metaphor  of a flood.  this is a stylized map of a flood plain, and the lines show how far inland,  the more frequent the more mild five year flood occurs.  and how far inland the more devastating floods happen,  which happen with less frequency.  and here is another way to show it, a little stylized picture of how to show it.  so you can see in the 100 year flood, it wipes out a lot of  economic activity, building wealth incurs a lot of loses.  then over time as you go back to the more modest floods,  memory recedes, people start building more.  they feel more confident they can build certainly in the margin of the less  frequent flood.  and as the memory fades,  people willing to take more risk to borrow more,  to build more, to invest more until you  get washed out by the next cataclysm.  i say this because it's important to remember what the role of memory has in  financial crises.  if your memory is dominated by a relatively benign period of economic  activity.  when things were going well, when unemployment was coming down,  when incomes were rising and when house prices were going up,  then the natural human view is to project that forward.  if your memory is of the recent experience with cataclysmic financial crisis,  you're gonna need more risk averse longer.  but memory tends to fade over time.  kindleberger tells his history of financial crises, manias, panics,  and crashes.  and this is sort of stylist arc of that pattern.  all crisis are different but  they all follow this basic arc of mania over confidence.  exuberance creates the risk of panic.  panic produces crash in economic activity, great depression like outcomes.  [music] 
[music]  so, why study the global financial crisis?  the first reason is that it's an important part of history,  by far the most important economic event since the 1930s and it is crucial for  understanding the world that followed.  for understanding the political dynamics in europe, for what is happening in  the united states economically and with regards to inequality, for changes that  are happening in asia and its relationship to the rest of the world, all of these  things have reverberations that are coming from the global financial crisis.  a second reason is that a crisis like the global financial crisis  could happen again, and if we're going to be prepared for  it happening again, we need to recognize what it is when we see it and  what the build up looks like before we get to it.  third, because we would like to prevent it from happening again.  so yes, we could have another crisis.  we would need to know what to do in that crisis, but ideally we don't have it all,  but if we don't have it at all we may need to take actions in advance of the crisis  and people need to understand why such things happen and  why such actions may be necessary.  finally, if the crisis does actually happen, all of our steps to prevent it  have not proved to be successful, then in the crisis itself we need to be prepared  to take actions that may not seem to make sense at first glance.  just like in an epidemic, people need to be quarantined, or in wartime,  sometimes people who really don't want to go and fight a war have to go fight a war.  there are things that we have to do from a policy perspective during a financial  crisis that would seem counter intuitive outside that crisis.  the only way that we're going to be able to do that successfully is for people,  for citizens of the country to understand why these things need to be done.  [music] 
[music]  since sub-prime mortgages are such an important part of understanding  the housing and financial crises, it's useful to just think about,  right at the outset, are these things possibly useful for anything at all?  are they, or are they in the language of some commentators, designed to fail?  is it that we've put something into place and  really we're just expecting this to fail?  now there's a good reason why people might think they were designed to fail.  so let's take a prototypical subprime mortgage.  prototypical subprime mortgage we're going to lend with the house as collateral  to a borrower, let's say he has a relatively poor credit history.  so a low credit score, perhaps around, a relatively low credit score,  perhaps around 600.  and has changed jobs several times in the last few years.  has a job but has changed jobs so it's not really a steady work history.  and they're looking to buy a house.  now one challenge for a lender, knowing that this loan  will not be able to conform under income limits or  credit limits to an agency buying it and guaranteeing it,  is that the lender ultimately is going to need to take the risk.  so how can they structure that?  well, one way they can structure is the very high interest rate.  so i'm gonna have a very risky loan, i can just charge you a very high interest rate.  what we should note right at the outset is this particular borrower will not be able  to afford to pay a very high interest rate in the early years of the loan.  it just won't work that way.  so what other structures could possible work?  well what we end up with,  is something that looks like the following in many cases.  we will start with a low rate for the first few years.  so let's say for the first three years the rate is 2%.  if the lender had just been setting a fixed rate mortgage for  the entire life of the loan, they perhaps would have need to set 7% or 8%.  instead they set it at 2% for the first three years.  then after the third year, the rate is set to adjust and  it will adjust relative to a short term reference rate.  let's say the libor rate plus 4%.  some very large amount, or 5%.  something that really will seem to be not payable  by the person who is taking out the loan.  so in that respect it seems like, you're just setting this person up to fail.  in a few years, their loan,  when the rate adjusts, they're not gonna be able to pay it.  so instead their only option at that point,  will be to try to refinance the loan.  this refinancing, however, is going to contractually incur a penalty.  so yes, you may take a 2% interest rate over the first three years.  but now, if you do choose to refinance after 3 years,  you will have to pay us a 5% penalty on the loan after 3 years.  and that penalty then goes directly to the bank.  we can think here of the pre-payment penalty,  effectively as a way to transfer some of the value,  some of the home appreciation back to the lender, after the fact.  since the lender knows this before the fact, and  knows that they'll be able to share in some of the appreciation of the house,  they're willing to offer a lower rate to begin with.  now, this again, might seem like, how can they possibly do this?  effectively what you're doing is,  your saying, either they're going to have to pay what might seem like an exorbitant  interest rate after three years, when the loan starts adjusting, or  they're gonna refinance and have to pay you a penalty.  seems somehow like, this doesn't seem quite right.  when would it be right?  seems like it's designed to fail, but  under what conditions could it actually work?  it can work under the conditions that everybody expects housing prices to rise.  and this is a complication or maybe even a nuance  that i think is under appreciated by people who look at sub-prime mortgages.  consider the following.  remember when we've looked at what happened to  housing prices in the united states?  we saw that they were going up very rapidly.  there was a picture of the reinhart and rogoth paper showing an 30% increase  just over the three years prior to the beginning of the housing crisis.  that's a very large increase.  if you're expecting over three years,  that houses will increase in price by 10%, much less 30%.  then after three years think of what has happened.  somebody has purchased a house for lets say $300,000.  and now here we are three years later and that house is worth $330,000.  they've had an appreciation in their wealth of $30,000.  let's say they only put down to buy the house in the first  place a very small amount.  maybe they only put down 5% of the houses' value.  $15,000 of equity was put down and here we are three years later and  the house has appreciated by $30,000, from 300 to $330,000.  they've made an enormous return on their $15,000 investment.  the $15,000 of equity they had in the house is now $45,000 of equity,  since they've added $30,000 to it.  now, if you think this is gonna happen.  as a borrower,  as a lender, what you would say is, look at where we stand at time zero.  when we were first making this decision, there was no way for you, as the borrower,  as the homeowner, to say to the bank, wait, i can't afford to pay a really high  interest rate today, but why don't we do the following thing.  why don't i promise you some portion of the increase in the value of my house,  that will happen over the next few years.  then you can charge me a lower interest rate today, i can live in the house.  and then i can pay you back in a few years when my house appreciates.  then we're all great.  by the way, worst case scenario what will happen is,  after three years the house doesn't appreciate.  oh.  now i've lived in the house for three years.  but now i'm probably not gonna be able to live in the house anymore.  but i would have been renting for three years somewhere else.  this is the reasoning that somebody can go through if they're thinking  the house prices will go up.  does not mean that reasoning is right.  and in fact, a big part of understanding what happens in a financial crisis,  is people thinking that certain asset prices will continue to go up.  what it does show is that under the belief, and it's a belief.  that we will see many market participants, borrowers,  lenders, buyers of securities, and  even some policy makers had, which is that housing prices will continue to go up.  and, as long as housing prices are continuing to go up,  it's kind of a nice little financial innovation, that a borrower can say,  let me give you some of my future increase, charge me less now.  essentially what they will do is after three years they will refinance  their mortgage.  a bank will gladly write them a slightly bigger mortgage,  because their house is worth more.  with that slightly bigger mortgage, they take a piece of it.  they pay the old bank off, the pre-payment penalty.  there's no extra money out of their pocket.  and now they have more equity in their house than they had at the start.  so that's what happens when things work well.  there's no reason to believe that every single person participating in this market  had all of these wonderful good intentions when they went into it.  but there is reason to believe that the person who saw house prices and  believed house prices would continue to appreciate,  thought that this could be a useful product.  and in fact, it is that very type of bubble thinking about  housing prices that's going to be a major cause for  the great run up that we see in the housing market.  [music] 
welcome to the question and answer session for  the global financial crisis course on coursera.  my name is andrew metrick and i'm a professor at yale university.  and i am here with secretary tim geithner, my co instructor for the course.  we asked the students in this course to pose questions to us in the online  discussion forum, and to vote on which questions were most interesting to them.  from the many excellent questions that were were sent to us,  we chose a selection that we thought was most connected to concepts in  the course that had a lot of up votes from other students and that we could weave  together into a discussion that we thought would be interesting and  would be a nice addendum to the course material.  so what i'm going to do is i'm going to ask questions of secretary geithner that  were posed to him, he will answer and  where appropriate, i will follow up and give my own opinions and  ask him to explain more about his, and so that's our plan.  so without further to do, let's go to the questions.  our first question comes from siddharth godavarti.  and the question is how can countries leverage their understanding of  the housing bubble, for instance, the bubble before the global financial crisis,  in addressing or mitigating today's markets and bubbles?  >> well, as we discussed in the course,  a key part of what caused the financial crisis in 08, 09, and  this happened not just in the united states but in countries around the world,  was you had this long period where total borrowing grew relative to income.  and that was financed by banks and  a variety of other institutions with a lot of risk, with a lot of leverage and  with funding that was raised short term that could run in a panic.  and so if you want to think about what's the best defense against that,  given the lessons from the crisis, we think the received  wisdom today is you first want to make sure that banks and financial  institutions run with less leverage, and more capital, and less funding risk.  that's really important, and there's been a lot of investments and  reforms to achieve that, and those constraints, those safeguards,  are much more conservative today.  but you also want to look at and  think about ways you can lean against periods  like we saw before the crisis where the amount of optimism about the future  produced a long rise in housing prices and a lot of borrowing against that.  and there's a lot of experimentation around the world of other ways  beyond capital requirements on banks to try to limit some of those risks.  for example, some countries are experimenting with raising down payment  requirements as you get into the later stage of a boom, that's one example.  and we're going to learn something in the next  few years about how effective those things are.  but that's the mix of safeguards most people think are powerful against the risk  of a crisis.  of course, ultimately,  a lot of what matters in terms of how damaging these things are when they turn  are what you do to protect the economy from the failures that happen.  >> now do you think, so you talked a little bit about raising down  payment requirements and we do hear about that as being,  the word that's used is macro credential tools, as being one of the tools.  so for example, if we see that there's a whole lot of mortgages at a very high  leverage, people have 5% equity in their houses, we just make a rule.  what would the mechanism be for such a rule?  do you have a sense, what's the powers that you need so  that if you could actually tell the whole country hey,  nobody is allowed to borrow unless they have at least 20% down.  >> well, in the united states, like in many countries, we have  several agencies that provide what's effectively the government guarantee for  a certain class of mortgages.  and for a lower income or  middle income american, they can borrow with a guarantee.  and you can decide that you're going to make that guarantee available only in  circumstances where people are able to and  prepared to put down a substantial amount of equity in home.  so that's one way to enforce that.  now in our system, of course, there's other ways to get a mortgage.  and it's possible that, even if you don't meet the conditions for  what the government will guarantee and support,  that the private markets will finance you with much lower down payment requirement.  of course, that happened in our crisis in the period before our crisis.  and in the us context, that's a very hard problem to solve,  because we run a system where we allow a lot of competition.  you use this metaphor, you can use better than me,  which is if you have two highways going to the same place, one with the speed limit,  one without, people are going to drive in the other highway and  it's not a great way to run a sort of policy designed to reduce accidents.  so that's a good example for illustrating the challenge in the us where your tools,  at least under existing law, are not comprehensive in your ability to  limit how much people borrow or really how much people lend.  >> it does seem a real challenge in the united states since as we discussed in  the course, a lot of the problems which happened in subprime and  in near prime type securities, those were not insured by fannie mae or freddie mac.  >> yeah, there is this dilemma in a market where you allow people that  are regulated and unregulated to compete in the provision of mortgages and  anybody can borrow, and they can decide how much they borrow.  and it's a challenge because in periods where people are optimistic about  the economy, about the path of house prices,  about people's ability to borrow safely, there will be capital of flow and  money will flow and people will be willing to finance that.  and that's a hard thing to lean against, particularly as before a crisis.  we had a long period, you could say decades long period where people thought  the fundamental risk of defaults, the house prices falling, of unemployment  rising acutely, the people mistakenly thought those risks were much diminished.  >> right, okay, well our next question,  our next question comes from fred schmidt.  and this question is, could the fed have incentivized the flow of money out of  the real estate bubble (or any bubble in that matter) prior to it popping?  the desire being to gradually slow down and thus defuse the bubble.  your book mentions how hiking the interest rate was a nonstarter, so  i'm just wondering if alternative, fed brainstormed ideas exist,  maybe regulate the cumulative total capital per organization in that sector,  or as you mentioned, maintain capital thresholds.  >> well, let's just go back to that period in history.  the fed did raise interest rates quite significantly in the years between,  i think we started tightening in 04 until maybe 03, 04 until 07.  and the fed raised rates several hundred basis points in that period of  time because the economy was expanding and  we thought at that point that was appropriate.  it's important to remember that at the same time we did that, the long rate,  which probably affects the price at which most people can borrow to support a house,  was flat, unchanged, or falling, even in the face of that.  and that's a symptom of a whole bunch of other things that are happening around  the world, including the fact that a bunch of countries like china with  large savings and a new ability to deploy those savings outside china were investing  in us financial assets.  so, even as the fed was raising rates, the long term rates and  therefore mortgage rates did not rise.  in some ways, they fell, even as we tightened.  and that overall context of interest rates was absolutely a contributing  factor to why people decided to borrow so much against their house, and  it helped feed the rise in house prices, and  definitely helped make investors more willing to lend against someone's house.  but the fact that low interest rates contributed to it,  doesn't mean that monetary policy can be a effective solution against these things.  both those things can be true, propositions, and.  it's hard to, i think it's hard.  i feel thought about this.  it's hard to run a strategy design, reduce the risk of  huge credit bubbles and leverage cycles, simply through the tool of tightening.  raising short rates, raising interest rates much more aggressively.  i find that implausible to be a desirable strategy, could it be effective strategy?  if you were brutal in how much you contracted the economy,  you induced a recession, you could have some effect but  would that be sensible given the broader economic cost of recessions?  so i think most of the burden for policy defending against these things  has to rely on a set of, a mix of other safe guards like we just discussed.  so a mix of limiting, i do think there's a very good policy reason for limiting how  much we all can borrow against the value of their home, it's hard to do.  i think it's very good policy to limit how much people can lend relative to equity,  it's about capital requirements, funding requirements, and  you want to apply those things as comprehensively as you can,  because it makes no sense to apply them to just one part of the financial system and  leave the rest of the system, it makes no sense.  you want to apply them broadly as you can.  and most of what you can sensibly do to limit the risks in booms,  housing booms and credit booms.  rests on that mix of policy tools.  we focus mostly in terms of the reform imperative lessons learned on things like,  capital and down payment requirements, things like that.  i think it is important to point out that there was a huge amount of fraud  in the pre-crisis american financial system.  there was a lot of bad incentives, a lot of bad regulation, inadequate regulation.  there are a lot of pockets or more hazard, classic more hazards on finances.  those things are all very important and to try to get right.  and we made some progress on those things on the reforms.  and better consumer protection.  and things like that.  i think it's for the recognizing, it's not all about capital and liquidity.  and those kind of shock absorbers.  i think, it's fundamentally most important about that, but  it's worth noting that there's lot of other things that go into,  trying to create a system that's less vulnerable to the types of abuse and  even risk that we saw in the crisis.  >> okay. our next question comes rohan jacob.  and that is, couldn't effective ongoing transparency  have headed the global financial crisis off, well before it  reached epic proportions bank off balance sheet investment vehicles, several major  players at the time not being aware of the scale of the problem, etc.?  what we're thinking about here focused more on transparency,  then on specific markets that seem to be out of balance.  >> transparency's always good and you should generally be for it.  and sure, if there was more information available comprehensively  before the crisis, that would've been a good thing.  but the main cause of the crisis was not fundamentally lack of transparency.  it was mostly, instead of uncertainty about, but  what was the risk that house prices might fall,  that the economy would go into a deep recession, that unemployment would double,  that therefore losses to banks would increase dramatically and  even maybe more important is what was the risk that there might be a classic run.  on the financial system and those were risks that transparency can't solve,  because they're a function of really unknowable things that are contingent on  behavior as you come off a long expansion  with a long rise in house prices and bubble, so, yeah, transparency is good.  but there's some fundamental things transparency can't solve,  and that's why generally, i think it's a good idea to realize that  these things that are called capital and liquidity buffers,  shock absorbers, you want to hold at nice conservative,  thick levels because there's fundamental things you just can't know.  that aren't predictable.  and so, you want to prepare for the unknowable in some sense.  and the best way to do that is to make sure you've got  a set of safeguards against what you can't foresee.  >> so, i think you're exactly right and transparency clearly,  when people point out that, for instance,  securitized vehicles transparent, no doubt that that is actually correct.  but it's also correct that, throughout financial history, whenever we've created  something that looks like money, the thing backing it has never been transparent.  and that's almost been the point.  our colleague gary talks about that a lot.  and you can see that as complex, as a securitized bond is,  it's far less complex than the balance sheet of goldman sacs or  the balance sheet of j p morgan, who are after all, also issuing short term  liabilities that are meant to be money-like.  so if we have short term things coming out of securitizations that are meant to be  money like, in fact it's a, what they would say in the tech world,  a feature not a bug, [laugh] that they're not transparent.  because you really don't want to have.  you'd already entering into a transaction with somebody that's supposed to be  a transaction, where you're exchanging something that's like money, where one  side is worried but the other side might have more information about that money.  and i think that this, this is a pretty big point.  it's one that we talked about a bit in the class but i find that it's one of  the hardest points and the most subtle points about the modern financial system  and how it has evolved, which is that you would never want to enter a transaction  with somebody where they handed you a $1 bill on the street for something and  you had to look in a book to figure out what that dollar was actually worth.  which treasury secretary signed it, determines how much it's worth.  that would bring commerce to a halt.  the same goes for using many of the types of bonds that we created  as collateral in transactions, just to make sure people knew they were safe.  and if you're in a world where you have to study them and  figure out what they're actually worth, you're not going to do that,  you're just going to run away from those types of transactions.  so, you could make all of the types of assets that we  use completely transparent, but who's actually going to spend the whole lot of  time deciding whether something is worth a $100 or $99.9 [laugh] so,  i think that we do sometimes confuse the observation  that there was a lot of lack of transparency leading up to the crisis,  with the idea that if that didn't exist, somehow we wouldn't have had a crisis.  >> that's a very fundamental thoughtful point.  but, just two other things that are interesting.  as michael lewis wrote famously in the big short, and you can see in the movie,  you could look into those complex securities,  cdo's of mortgage-backed securities, even cdo squared, and  you could go into those things and look down into those mortgages, and have a lot  of information that might help you make a judgement of how much risk was in that.  not many people did that, but it was not a problem of transparency in some sense.  and, again, it's important to know that, even with that knowledge, lots of people  decided they were a safe thing to buy, even at those very low yields.  just another point about this.  in the stress test, we used a solution that involved some dimensions of  transparency to try to figure out a way to recapitalize the banking system and  stabilize the banking system, protect the economy from that trauma.  but what we really did is to say that, we're going to force these  firms to have capital to cover losses, and we set what those losses were.  and the transparency in it was really a combination of us saying that we want you  to be prepared to absorb losses of x across these different types of mortgages,  loans to businesses, credit cards.  and then, the transparency was just in revealing what  the banks held of those things, which is also already accessible in some sense.  so, even there, we called this a transparency solution.  we were,  we didn't know with any certainty what the losses might be in a really bad recession.  we just wanted to anchor the capital judgment on an estimate of what we think  might be a conservative estimate of those things.  >> okay, our next question comes from somebody who only gave us one name, olaf.  and the question is,  the course only indicates policies as the solution to crisis.  what about solutions in reforming the banking system and  making it more transparent?  or preventing leverage strategies (multiplication) of  investments/loans, etc.?  i read this question as kind of pulling together a lot of the themes that we've  been discussing, and let me put my own spin on it to you.  which is suppose we get everything right, can we prevent having crises?  can we live in a world without crises or  do we always have to worry about what we're going to do if we're in one?  >> i think that's a very good question.  i think that you don't want to design a system or  your regulations in a system to prevent the failure of financial institutions or  to prevent losses to investors in a recession or  to prevent prices of equities or from falling.  you might think that would be a good thing because it would take out a bunch of risk,  but that would be a bad system for a bunch of different reasons.  so, your system should be based on the recognition,  there's a desirable amount of failure that should happen in a market economy.  we want to make the system as safe for failure and i think crises in finance  systems are inevitable, they're not fully foreseeable or preventable at some level.  what is the legitimate objective of a policy is to reduce the damage they cause,  to employment, to wealth, to savings, to businesses.  and so, what i think we should try to achieve is a level, a set of reforms that  reduce the risk that when institutions make bad judgements or fail, that  those failures don't cause the type of catastrophic trauma we saw in our crisis.  and again, that requires a mix of things that you can do through regulation  like limitations on leverage, or like capital requirements, or things like that.  but ultimately, those things are probably not going to be enough and  you want to make sure you have a strong fire department.  a strong ability to come in and try to reduce the risk that those failures  spread through contagion across the system, like we saw in 08.  >> to go back to the analogy that you mentioned earlier  about having two highways and the speed limits on those highways.  if we thought we must end all fatal accidents, well we could do that.  we say the speed limit on both of these highways is now  one-tenth of a mile an hour [laugh] and we're going to put people in jail for  life if we catch them violating it.  that would certainly prevent traffic fatalities.  but nobody would get anywhere.  so, we somehow think that the right model is there is some speed limit but  then we also make sure that people are wearing seat belts and  they have airbags and the cars have all kinds of safety systems.  and somehow that's the balance so  that maybe even if we knew we could write rules that would prevent financial crisis.  it probably wouldn't be optimal to do so,  because it would slow down a lot of other things.  you mentioned in your first lecture about the idea that  the longer we go without a crisis makes it more likely that people  are going to simply forget about the crisis and think it can't happen again.  i think that's also a challenge that's always there.  which is, were we to succeed with a package of proposals,  a package of rules that actually led us to have 50 years without a crisis, it just  gets harder and harder after that because people think, well the rules will save us.  >> absolutely, it's not a good reason not to try, it certainly would reduce  the damage of crisis, but you have to recognize that if you succeed and  you deliver a long period of stability, then you're inherently more vulnerable.  >> no matter what, we can't fire our fire department.  [laugh] okay, so i want to turn now to things that were done in the crisis.  so, question comes from benedict treloar and  the question is the justification for the choice of actions during the crisis  is that the ones taken were those which preserved more jobs.  however, the distributional effects of the actions taken during and  after the crisis disproportionately preserved and  then deepened the wealth of the 1% and they kept their jobs,  while ordinary americans were not helped with their personal deleveraging as much.  in future crises, do you believe that this single focused mandate around job creation  is the correct thing to target?  if so, why?  if not, what should the alternative target be?  and i should say,  no one's requiring that you accept all the premises of this question.  [laugh] but certainly, these premises are one that are shared by a lot of  citizens who watch the reactions to the crisis.  >> very thoughtful question.  what do we think we were managing, to what objective?  we were trying to reduce the amount of damage that happened to  the average citizen of the country, and the average business.  reduce the risk that people lose their jobs, reduce the risk that income would  fall precipitously, reduce the risk that people's savings would be destroyed.  reduce the risk that businesses would cut investment,  cut deeply into the bone of not just in the muscle and the fat of companies.  and therefore leave the economy vulnerable to a very long periods, like we've  seen throughout history, long long period operating well below potential.  so, we were trying to manage to those set of outcomes and i think the strategy  we adopted was very effective in limiting some of the risk of what we saw in  the great depression or in lots of countries even after the great depression.  now it's true that recessions themselves are regressive in their impact.  they're going to hurt the poor much more than the relatively well off.  that's just a sad, tragic fact of recessions.  again, one reason why it's important to be aggressive in your response.  but it's also true that the tools we used over time after the immediate  crisis faded, the mix of those tools changed over time.  and if you just think about two of those tools, one is about fiscal policy,  which goes to things like tax cuts or basic benefits people get or  the amount of investments we make in infrastructure.  and things the fed was doing by trying to lower long-term interest  rates after they'd already taken short rates to zero.  the mix of those tools and  the burden on both those tools did change as we came out of the crisis.  and the availability of the fiscal tools,  which might have had somewhat better distributional effects,  as your question implies, diminished.  we got some additional stimulus after the recovery act.  but overall fiscal policy, if you look at the state and  local governments which were forced to fire a lot of public employees, overall  fiscal policy turned contractionary in probably the middle of 2010.  and that was a big drag in the economy and  that shifted more of the burden to what the fed was trying to do.  and because the fed can only operate through a set of things that affect  long-term interest rates and other asset prices and  the exchange rate, that helped produce the effect you've seen.  so, if you think about the optimal mix back then and probably even today,  if you think about the challenges facing many countries around the world today is  to try to put more of the burden on fiscal policy in context where you're  certainly, when you're already pretty low on ammunition in the central banks.  does that make sense [crosstalk]? >> yeah, it does.  i think we all struggle with this kind of question, which is that the optics and  the politics around what was necessary to do, what we believe was necessary  to do to keep the economy from ending up in great depression 2.0.  we know those optics were bad at some level,  and certainly, it raises the question to me.  is there a way we can do it so that either we're explaining it better,  it's hard to explain, or we're actually managing to be less regressive or at least  have some policies that are headline policies that are less regressive?  because it has real effects, not just just on the economy and on the distribution,  but on our ability to do things in the future.  and i certainly don't have an answer to that.  and i know that you've been answering questions about this for a long time.  is there some way to do it that ends  up not just working as well, or working better, but  actually making it actually more palatable from distributional perspective?  i don't know.  >> well, i think that to go to the core of what you were saying appropriately is  about the design of the, that's called the financial rescue.  is there a way to do that in a way that feels less unjust,  is less unjust at the first order of effects?  and i tragically to say, i'm deeply skeptical of that.  because i think that putting aside the question about how the prosecutors across  the country decide how to go after people who committed fraud or broke the law,  which, of course, has to be a fundamental part of any credible,  legitimate government response to a crisis.  however disappointed you might be about what actually they did, what they found to  do, i think they would say, we tried to be as aggressive as we could,  within the scope of the law, on those things.  that should be a central part of that.  but on the core design of the financial rescue,  i think the mix of things we did were very progressive in their impact.  because they had a very powerful direct effect  in limiting the risk that people would lose more jobs,  in making the recovery income loss much,  much more quickly, restoring a lot of loss savings.  and those things are very powerful for the average person.  it means the people who might in the fall of '08, early '09 thought they might have  to work five years longer, ten years longer before they can retire.  it took out a lot of that risk.  it substantially reduced the amount housing, the amount of people,  families that lost houses.  those things were,  even though the immediate effect looked like it was rewarding the unjust,  and there were a bunch of undeserving but unintended beneficiaries of those actions.  they're objective and they had a very powerful effect on limiting the damage for  people who were really innocent of the things that caused the crisis.  >> okay, our next question comes from benjamin chua.  and it is a short one but a hard one.  what was your biggest regret with regards to the global financial crisis?  >> i have a lot of time to think this and  of course a lot of things i wish we could have done differently.  i think that there are two types of policy mistakes or  policy choices that we made as a country.  that were,  the most important in terms of the amount of damaged caused by the recession.  and the first of those was that we,  as a country were escalated late  in trying to reduce the risk of major panic and major financial collapse.  you know a lot of people i think, think that if i look at lower actions after  the fall of '08 and said gee, they did massive dramatic trillions and  trillions of dollars of guarantees and capital and things like that.  but the crisis began much earlier than that and the crisis was gaining momentum  causing a lot of damage going into the fall of '08 and  we were late in escalating.  i say late, mostly because we are, tools were limited.  and we didn't have the ability to prevent the type of damage caused by the failure  of a major investment bank before the congress passed emergency authority.  and so because of that limitation authority, mostly because of that,  probably because we had a bunch of disagreements about how serious this would  be, we were late in escalating.  and that was a big part of what made the crisis so  deeply scary and traumatic and damaging.  the second thing, as we've already discussed,  was that fiscal policy which was a necessary  part of any credible strategy to reduce the risk of a great depression.  fiscal policy was powerful, not as powerful as it should have been initially,  but powerful initially, but faded too quickly.  and therefore, as we were coming out of the crisis,  we had growth weaker than it should have been or could have been.  particularly because the rest of the world, europe was very fragile,  at a time it would have been helpful to have that additional support.  so i think those two policy choices, mistakes, little late  to get the fire engines, the fire station mobilized and a little too quickly  to turn fiscal policy contractionary, we're avoidable.  if you could have solved the politics around the authority question and  fiscal policy thing and they were very consequential.  >> well let me ask you a specific follow up then in there,  which i didn't warn you about but it won't surprise you since you've heard it before.  so let's take the weekend just before lehmann brothers fell.  and, we've talked a lot in the course about the things that happened right after  that and how people thought it was going to be bad, but  it turned out to be really, really bad.  so let me ask a question and i'll try it a couple different ways,  which is, should there have been some extraordinary effort,  even beyond the extraordinary efforts that were tried,  to keep lehman brothers from filing for bankruptcy that monday morning?  >> we talked about this, but it's a very good question, i think it still is,  you could say, the central question.  and the central source of disagreement debate about our strategy in the crisis  and it is.  it was our judgement at the time and it's still my view today.  and i know that view is shared by my colleagues at the fed and  the treasury was that the federal reserve and the us government did not  have the legal ability to prevent lehman from collapsing in the context.  and it's not even clear, if you had the ability,  that that would've been optimal response given  the complicated set of objectives we faced.  because you can't design your strategy, as a strategy designer,  to prevent all failure, when people took a lot of risk going into this crisis.  the important thing was that we didn't have a set of defensive  safeguards in place to prevent that failure from infecting,  from contaminating, from accelerating the run of the rest of the system.  in fact, the us government did some things even the days after that.  that accelerated the run and helped the run spread from investment banks to banks,  but i don't believe we had a set of choices.  and now why is that?  and i think that people find that implausible maybe because we showed a fair  amount of creativity after that in trying to get ahead of the evolving crisis.  and that's because that was designed at inception by law with pretty limited  authority to provide financial support to an institution that was not a bank.  this was an investment bank not regulated by the fed, fed had supervisory authority.  and the way congress structured the law was to limit, mostly for  moral hazard reasons, to limit our ability to provide support to an institution that  did not exist within the regulatory constrain of banks.  even was an investment bank,  and we could only lend against collateral to the extent that we felt that  we'd have the ability to protect the taxpayer from a loss in that context.  and there was no plausible argument that we could make and  i've been exposed to no argument that would change my view on that of history.  that we could've leant to them on a scale that would've been legal given that  reading of the law and large enough to save them from collapse.  a tragic limitation of authority and  very consequential to the evolution of the crisis.  >> we're going to move onto a set of questions that are general questions and  also questions about regulation and what the world looks like going forward.  this one is from al music.  and the question is, how much leverage is too much and and  how do we deleverage without damaging the economy?  and most importantly, how do we manage our massive deficit?  and these seem to be related questions if we think being over levered is a problem,  how do we define over levered?  >> that's a deep, deep question, and it has lots of dimensions.  your combining in one question,  a set of questions about what's a prudent level of borrowing for our country.  for a government like the united states.  what's a prudent level of leverage for a financial institution or an individual?  and those are really, i think, different type of economic questions.  what is safe for the us to borrow is a fundamentally different question  what's safe for a company to borrow or an individual to borrow.  so let me start with the fiscal question for the government today.  right now, we're running a deficits roughly 3% our gdp,  maybe a little bit lower.  and our total public debt outstanding that held by the public is about 75% than our  gdp, about 30 percentage points higher than it was before the crisis.  that's a sustainable deficit for the united states, meaning we could  run at that level and not have the debt rise the economy.  you could argue that that could continue for  some time without any risk to the real economy.  the risk for the united states is that if you look past the next 5 years,  and certainly the next 10 or 20 years, rising healthcare costs for  aging populations start to push those deficits up to much more alarming levels.  and therefore, the size of our total debt relative to the amount of  money we produce as a country starts to grow to a more alarming level.  so over time we're going to have to figure out a way to bring those lines back into  a more a sustainable balance.  the question about how much leverage a bank should be allowed to loan is  a question about how much capital is enough.  and you can think about this in lots of different ways.  one way to think about it is what type of crisis do you want to protect against?  is it the 100 year flood, or the 50 year flood, or  the 30 year flood, and that's part of the question.  and in general,  you want capital requirements to be much higher than they were before the crisis,  and those requirements to be applied much more broadly.  but there are some questions that go to the degree,  the extent, how far can you go?  because some tradeoffs, once you go higher, and a lot of those tradeoffs  are not really about what you do to the cost of credit, probably.  it might increase it slightly.  but they're much more about what happens if you run a system like we were  discussing before where you limit leverage for one class of entities like banks,  but let other people provide bank-like services without those constraints.  and one way to think about the question about optimal capital,  optimal leverage how far would she go relates to this basic question about how  you manage that risk that if you make the much more conservative that apply just to  one part of the system.  and overtime what happens is,  like water flows around stone in a river, risk just migrates.  and again, if you look back at the us system before a crisis, one thing that  happened to a pretty dramatic scale in our country before the crisis.  and one thing that made the crisis so damaging and hard to manage was that even  the much lower capital requirements then were thick enough to provide a pretty  substantial incentive for risk to move outside the banking system.  and that created a system where you had banks who were a relatively small share of  the us financial system.  but institutions like investment banks, or other entities who were doing similar  things to banking, became much larger and they were very risky.  and that's part of the challenge.  so you definitely want to have capital requirements, liquidity buffers,  more conservative.  and you want to apply those constraints more broadly.  but you have to be careful if you go too far,  you might create banks that are more stable but a system that is less stable.  >> sometimes the questions boil down to the idea that there are some commentators  and people who study these markets who look at them the way we would look at  the earth, with a certain amount of land and a certain amount of water.  and think that in the financial world, we can have an effect on how much and and  how much water there is.  we can have effect on the total amount of debt in the world, whereas another view,  and a view that i believe to be more consistent with the evidence is,  we can kind of dam stuff up.  we can move the water around, but the total amount of the water that we have is  somehow the total amount of debt that we're going to have in the world is almost  a little bit of a primitive and certainly not under the control of the government.  >> that's a proxy for  how much people want to lend and how much people want to borrow.  >> and how much- >> and if  i- >> of their  portfolios- >> yet they want to-  >> they want to have in super safe stuff.  >> right, right.  >> which is very difficult for our government to mandate.  now, you can say we're going to move it out of the banks or  we're going to move it out of this part of the system.  and certainly regulation can do that but i've yet to see a suggestion.  and i would very much like to see one [laugh] that would enable us to kind of  change the total amount of leverage world wide period.  i think that's a very difficult thing to do.  >> i mean, you might be able to do it in theory,  you could do it in some places for some period of time [laugh].  >> right, right.  >> but overtime, and sometimes it can take a really long time.  in our context, it took maybe 30 to 40 years for  it to really reach dangerous proportions.  this isn't an argument against having very conservative capital requirements and  it's not argument for saying you can't do anything about the migration,  the risk problem.  you can do things about that but you have to recognize some of that's inherent.  an unsolvable dilemma because you said you can't fundamentally control  the amount of debt people are willing to issue or finance.  >> right, and i think that's it, right?  it's not so much that we shouldn't try, or  there's nothing that we can do about any part of it.  but just that we have to recognize that, when we have a policy,  it's going to move things around as much as it changes levels of things.  okay, so, turning a little bit to things going on around the world now,  we have a question from claire johnston.  and the question is, what is different about what is happening in financial  market today than what happened in the financial crisis that we just studied?  which i consider to be an example of a type of question that i hear a lot.  how worried should i be when i look out at the world now?  >> well there's a lot to be worried about in the global economy today and  there's a lot of areas of, how should i say it?  there's a set of pretty daunting challenges facing most countries around  the world.  growth is relatively slow,  much lower than people thought it would be before the crisis.  you still have a lot of damage left over from the crisis.  and although in the united states we've healed a lot of that damage, in europe,  for example, they're a much earlier stage of even repairing the damage caused by  the worst stage of the crisis.  and there's countries around the world that are going through a sort of different  set of challenges of their own.  and that's part of what's producing this broader  sort of dark cloud of concern and pessimism.  it's sort of healthy, [laugh] to have a world worried about these risks.  i think if you think about what's the odds that they  prove to be as damaging as they were in 07, 08?  that's a complicated combination of judgments.  and you can say, i think, with some confidence that because there's much more  post-reform, there's much more capital in the financial system,  that you don't have the same vulnerabilities.  certainly not in the united states that you had in the us in 07 and  08, and those requirements are applied much more broadly.  that's a very important fundamental thing.  but it's also true that the other tools that we used were so important,  we used very aggressively in the crisis like monetary policy and fiscal policy.  there's less scope, interest rates are at zero today and  there's less scope to use those tools aggressively,  as aggressive even as we did in the crisis in response to another crisis today.  and the fire fighting authorities as we discussed,  are weaker than they were in the crisis.  so we talked about how damaging it was that we went into the crisis with pretty  limited authority.  congress gave us very substantial emergency authority,  we used that very aggressively, very creatively.  but then in the reforms,  partly because of the concern about the political backlash and because of moral  hazard, the congress dialed back and took away some of those authorities.  so just to put it together, the capital cushion of the system is much thicker.  makes the financials much more resilient, which is a good thing.  the keynesian monetary policy, fiscal policy arsenal, macro arsenal, which is  also very fundamental, is really weaker everywhere than it was before the crisis.  not every country's out of ammunition, but it's much weaker,  much diminished, and the firefighting tools that were so  necessary to prevent, to break a panic and prevent a collapse of  the financial system are i think much weaker then they were in the crisis.  and that's a very consequential weakness, so  that's one way to think about the vulnerability and the risk.  >> right, so following up on that,  kind of a specific question given these things, comes from ron logghe.  and he says that mervyn king, who was the former head of the bank of england,  warns of a new financial crisis sooner, rather than later.  what are your thoughts on the us being ale to weather another financial  crisis at this time after our recent recovery?  so if we were to have one over the next few years,  given all the constraints that you've described.  so we have, in terms of our monetary policy, our fiscal policy,  whatever political restrictions exist, our authority, could we do it?  the people who were in the jobs that you held in 2007 and 2008.  do you think that they have the tools that would be necessary to fight that crisis?  >> well i think that, if you think about just to go back to the comparison with 07,  08, the risk of that type of crisis,  produced by the set of circumstances in us at that time, it's just very different.  that risk is different and lower, and much lower probability today.  we face that same spark, that it was so powerful in a way.  but as we were just discussing, our ability to respond if that were to happen,  because of some events mostly outside the united states, we have more limited tools.  so let's just talk about the firefighting tools, just so it's worth talking about.  if you go back to ultimately what happened, and what broke the panic and  set the conditions for growth coming back, unemployment coming down,  was the aggressive use of a mix of capacity to inject capital.  to have the central bank do what central banks have to do,  which is to lend against collateral, and to guarantee a bunch of  liabilities of the financial system against the risk of run.  to break a run, you have to induce people to stay, not to run, and  that usually involves some mix of guarantees.  and we did a range of things to backstop all the other funding  markets that matter to businesses and individuals,  to backstop the commercial paper market, the asset-backed securities market.  so if you just step back today and  look at what we have today relative to what was necessary in the crisis,  the fed has preserved most of its lender of last resort authority,  but could no longer intervene to lend to an individual non-bank.  like we did with aig, or  to help facilitate the bear stearns acquisition by jp morgan.  so that's a somewhat weaker set of tools for the fed in a consequential way.  probably more consequentially, the congress took away the fdic's authority to  guarantee the broader liabilities of a bank or bank holding company in a crisis.  that's a very consequential limitation.  we have no standing authority after the expiry of the emergency authority to put  capital into failing institutions.  we have somewhat better resolution authority to help safely  dismember or unwind a failing non-bank, like aig.  that authority is someone untested.  better than what we had before the crisis.  but, it's designed for kind of a different type of crisis than we had in 08.  it's really designed for a crisis where the world is stable but an individual  bank, or non-bank, gets itself to the point where it can't operate anymore.  so it's more designed for the single failure.  a very small number of manageable failures.  not for the circumstance, where the system as a whole is at the risk of failure.  could the fed do more?  yeah, the fed could do more.  and of course, if congress was willing, we could still  expand our deficit temporarily to provide the types of support individuals and  businesses that help cushion the crisis.  but again, our debt burden is higher.  and our, even with a willing congress,  we don't have quite the ability we had even in 07 and 08 to substantially  expand the force of the government to cushion the effects of the crisis.  so i would say, on net more resilient financial system but  weaker keynesian tools and substantially weaker fire fighting tools.  >> now you mentioned several times that congress has the authority, and  of course congress has the authority and should have the authority to be able to  take extraordinary measures that we don't already have or you do under the law.  what i sometimes worry about, but admit to being much of a political novice,  is that the backlash from what happened.  the political backlash that seemed apparent from what happened from  the efforts that were made in 2007,  2008, 2009, are such that at least with the short memories that we're usually  going to have in a political cycle, make it much more difficult for  congress to give the extraordinary authority that might be needed.  that these political constraints might turn out to be quite severe.  i don't know if you have a view on that.  spent, i'm sure,  a lot lot of time trying to get permission [laugh] from congress to do things.  do you think that that would be a lot harder for the next treasury secretary?  >> i think it just depends on how serious the crisis is and  how deep into it are you.  remember, if you go back to '07, '08,  us had no memory of a crisis like that since the great depression.  and so you might think well, it should be better this time because  people realized how bad that really was, how much damage it caused.  but for the reasons you said it might be substantially worse.  you might find congress even more reluctant than they were in the fall  of '08 to legislate.  and just remember how costly, delay is.  go back to that period of time.  the costs of delay in being able to escalate were tragic,  were traumatic on the economy.  and the amount of things we had to do to offset that damage from even  what we might say, just a matter of weeks delay, was profound.  so, would congress act with more alacrity this time to equip a president,  a central bank, or the fdic with more authority?  it's hard to know.  it depends how pervasive is the fear, and how confident is the recognition  that it's going to be necessary, inevitable, to deploy those proto tools.  it's just a noble thing.  of course, you know there's many elected members of congress who would say today,  they lost their seats because of their  unpopular vote in favor of swiss authority.  even though, of course, there was no alternative at the time and  it was the best way to protect the country from a risk of a great depression.  >> well, thank you.  that concludes our question and answer session for today, and that was fun,  thanks a lot.  >> thank you, andrew.  [music] 
[music]  over the last two modules we've talked about how sub-prime mortgages were  a publicly known problem by early 2007 and the institutions that had  direct sub-prime exposures began to fail in the first half of the year.  these failures were not expected to be a problem for the broader economy or for  the financial system.  recall ben bernanke's speech in may of 2007, where after careful analysis,  federal reserve analysts had decided that, yes,  sub-prime was an issue, but no, it would not infect the whole financial system.  that change in the summer of 2007, wholesale funding markets came  under pressure first, and notably, in the asset-backed commercial paper market.  this pressure contributes significantly to the failure of institutions and  markets that would at first glance appear to be unrelated or  sufficiently insulated from these problems.  the examples that we discussed in this module were northern rock, a building  society in northeast england that had very, very minimal sub-prime exposure.  auction rate securities, a market in this case focused on municipal securities  that had no direct link at all to the sub-prime market except in so  far as their bond insurers also had an exposure to the sub-prime market.  and then finally bear sterns,  a large investment bank that certainly was very involved in sub-prime, but not nearly  to the level that should have been able to wipe out their entire equity cushion.  the vulnerabilities that came forward starting in the summer of 2007 and  going through the failure of bear sterns were not fixed.  they were in fact too complicated and not well understood at the time.  and this would lead to much more significant problems  as the anxiety would turn to a panic in the fall of 2008.  [music] 
[music]  what have we learned in this module?  first, the causes and the immediate consequences of the global financial  crisis, were similar between europe and the united states.  ireland and iceland are two good examples.  ireland had a lending boom fueled by wholesale funding.  leading to a domestic housing bubble.  the government's aggressive actions to guarantee irish banks,  which would have worked if they had the capacity to do it,  ended up backfiring into a sovereign debt crisis.  iceland, which was not in the eurozone and  had its own currency, built a financial center based on foreign lending.  first, wholesale lending and later, through retail online accounts.  with its government clearly unable to support any guarantee,  icelandic banks were nationalized and  ended up defaulting on foreign depositors in the wake of the lehman bankruptcy.  after 2009 the eurozone countries lurched from crisis to crisis,  with intertwined banking, sovereign debt, and growth problems.  we will discuss this at length in the next module.  [music] 
[music]  so what have we learned in this module?  housing crisis and financial crisis are intertwined, but  they're not exactly the same thing.  in the united states, foreclosure was a national phenomenon, but  it was significantly worse in some regions and for some types of mortgages.  the regions that it was worse in are what we call the sand states.  california, florida, arizona, and nevada.  and the types of mortgages that it was worse for are subprime mortgages or  really any non-prime mortgages that don't conform to agency standards.  and mortgages that had adjustable rates, rather than fixed rates.  it's important to remember, however, that this was some what of a universal crisis.  it's not as though it was focused while it was worse in some areas and for  some types of mortgages.  it was not only in those areas and indeed prime mortgages.  the ones that are guaranteed by the us government.  that meet the most stringent standards, actually failed at a positive rate.  at a noticeable rate, which is. 
[sound] let's summarize what we've learned in this module.  first, in the years leading up to the global financial crisis,  the global demand for safe assets, which we've called information  insensitive assets increased significantly predominantly from countries  with significant current account surpluses as the global savings glut  countries from european banks and from institutional cash pulls.  the supply of safe government debt was insufficient to meet this excess demand.  it's a very big change in the world, and over these years, the demands increased,  but the supply that was coming from the traditional sources, the government and  agencies of the government, was insufficient to meet that demand.  financial institutions responded as they always do,  by manufacturing what was needed.  this is something financial institutions did in the united states in the early  19th century with bank notes that would serve as currency, in the late 19th  century by creating demand deposits, checking accounts, that would effectively  serve as money and they would continue this process of meeting the demands for  safe transactions media type of assets all throughout of modern financial history.  in the 21st century they primarily use securitization to do this.  securitization is a very useful activity in the abstract,  even for non financial firms.  it's bankruptcy remote when we create a securitization vehicle, it is bankruptcy  remote from the parent, and thus from any managerial risk of the parent.  and furthermore, it can use efficient liquidation itself  if it is in distress and the value of the underlying assets fall.  altogether, there's a lot of efficiency gains to this.  and as long as you can do it in a way where the majority of the debt that has  been created is indeed safe, information insensitive debt,  then you have managed just like banks who created checking accounts  to create a financial instrument that is serving a very important purpose.  the problem happens when what you have created that used to seem safe and  information insensitive suddenly starts to seem like it is not safe.  that's the same problem that we've had in bank runs from the beginning of time.  if the bank had demand deposits and you thought of them as safe.  and the checks from that bank is safe, and then all of a sudden you got worried about  the underlying solvency of that bank, and those demand deposits were no longer safe.  that same thing is what happened in securitization,  and we will talk a lot more about that over the next few modules.  [music] 
[music]  let's summarize what we've learned in this module.  first, as we've discussed in the previous two modules, the causes and  the consequences of the global financial crisis were similar between europe and  the united states.  but since the panic phase of the global financial crisis ended in mid-2009,  the euro zone countries have entered a double-dip recession  with a spiral of three interlocking crises.  all feeding upon each other, banking, sovereign debt, and growth.  if the euro is maintained as a single currency, then the eurozone countries will  either require great luck, very significant debt forgiveness or  an internal adjustment between the north and the south.  that requires either inflation in countries like germany and france,  which seems very unlikely, or deflation in countries like greece and  portugal, which seems very scary for the economies of those countries.  the parallels between the gold standard during the great depression, and  the euro, following the global financial crisis, are two significant to ignore.  and we should not have to have learned these lessons a second time.  [music] 
[music]  popular explanations of the housing crisis focus on three hypotheses.  first would be bad behavior, or moral hazard inside job where the story is that  consumers, borrowers were mislead into taking out certain loans and  they were mislead into taking out certain loans by lenders and  financial intermediaries who had no skin in the game.  and only incentives to try to make money loan by loan.  second would be government failure, bad policies.  bad policies and bad job oversight, even for the policies that we do have.  and then finally, bubble thinking.  people just got it wrong.  they expected housing prices to keep going up.  both the people who were borrowing for their houses, and  the people who were ultimately holding those mortgages.  the evidence for the first two hypotheses is weak.  subprime mortgages do not appear to be designed to fail.  in fact, they perform just fine until the crisis hit.  furthermore governments have been active in mortgage markets for  50 years before the crisis.  and finally insiders appeared to be just as surprised by the down turns  as everybody else.  as they lost an enormous amount of money on very large exposures, and  were telling themselves and their clients through their reports  that they expected things to not be nearly as bad.  instead, what it looks like, is that after a long period of stability.  many market participants were afflicted with bubble thinking and  the macro economic forces of the early 2000's allowed this  bubble thinking to fester into a crisis.  [music] 
[music]  so why have the after-effects of the global financial crisis been so  much worse in the eurozone than in the united states?  in the united states while the recovery was somewhat slow,  there was no double dip recession and within several years,  unemployment had gone back down very close to pre-crisis levels.  in the eurozone, we're nowhere near achieving that, why?  there's one mean central reason, and that reason is that the eurozone  is not what economists call an optimal currency area.  we have more than one currency in the world.  nobody thinks, or at least nobody who studies this issue carefully thinks  that we should have only one currency in the world.  it's useful to have multiple currencies.  it's useful to have multiple currencies because if you have a shock  that hits one particular place,  it's good to be able to have monetary policy that can react to that shock.  that's the advantage of having your own currency, if you are a country.  is that, if something happens and you need to have a looser policy, you can do it.  of course, the disadvantage of having your own currency,  is that it creates additional transactions costs with other countries,  people need to exchange in and out of your currency.  creates a certain amount of uncertainty, because when someone invests in a country  with their own currency, they don't know what will happen to that currency and  that's a risk that they have to deal with in their investment.  and it also runs the risk that a country may not manage its monetary policy well.  it was those downsides that led many of the countries, in what is now  the eurozone, to decide that they would be better off with a single currency.  it was also a bit of a political and a social experiment set by a whole  series of goals to tie the countries of the eurozone closer together with  their single currency and the increase in trade that they would then receive.  it was understood by many people about that time  in 1992 when the treaty was signed that there might be some challenges.  and the challenges are that in the absence of countries having their own monetary  policy, the adjustment process to some shock, requires that other things move.  labor needs to move or money needs to move from one part of the system to another.  or you need to have wage or price reductions or deflation.  these things are easier to do in some places than others.  let's compare and contrast what would happen for example, with the shock in  the united states as compared to a shock that would happen in the eurozone.  i'm in connecticut, if in connecticut,  we get a very bad economic shock, there are automatic stabilizers  in the federal system in the united states that enable us to recover from that shock.  the citizens of other states all pay taxes to the federal government and  the federal government makes transfers to unemployed people in connecticut.  if connecticut all of a sudden had the most unemployed people in the country,  connecticut would automatically get the most assistance from washington.  there's no vote and there's no way for  citizens of other states to pull back on that in the short term.  similarly, while there are cultural differences in the united states,  there are many people in connecticut with roots and friends and  family in other states of the united states.  and who were able to move if there were a shock here from connecticut to other  parts of the united states without it being an enormous problem for them.  compare that to what goes on in europe.  when there is a shock that happens to greece or to portugal, while it  is legally possible for people from greece and portugal to move to germany or  to france and many have, there are cultural differences,  linguistic differences, religious differences in many cases.  and just the lack of having roots in those countries that make that movement more  difficult.  so if you were unemployed in greece or in portugal, it is not so  simple for you to go and to find a job in germany.  not as simple as it would be for someone from connecticut, for  example, to move to california.  in addition to reduced labor mobility,  there is a lack of fiscal federalism in europe that is  nowhere near the level of where we currently have it in the united states.  so as it would be for the unemployment insurance in the united states,  if people all lost their jobs in connecticut,  there would be automatically money flowing from the citizens of other states.  that doesn't happen in greece.  rather, when greece has enormous problems, there's no direct transfer that will  happen from countries like germany and france that are doing better.  instead, there's a need to go back to the citizens of those countries and  ask for what sounds like a bail out.  where in reality what we often have at least in part  are the after effects of a shock.  the lack of this fiscal adjustment, automatic fiscal transfers, or  easy labor mobility means that eurozone countries faced with this shock,  not having their own monetary policy,  are left to rely on the last two things on this list.  that is, nominal wage and price reductions or deflation.  this type of deflation also called an internal price adjustment.  so rather than adjusting your prices all at once by having your  currency depreciate, which automatically means that your prices are now going  to be lower relative to everybody else who doesn't have your currency.  and you do it in one fell swoop.  rather than being able to do that,  you have to effectively go business to business and individual to individual  recognize the problems in the market and reduce prices and reduce wages.  this creates an additional challenge for any economy that is heavily indebted.  if my mortgage and my debts are in one currency and  those are fixed and you reduce my earnings  in that same currency, then my debt seems even bigger than it was before.  this is a debt overhang problem that is exacerbated by any kind of deflation.  we often worry about inflation.  inflation is normal to us,  we've seen it in many different economies at many different times.  deflation is a very rare thing to happen under a non-metallic  currency such as we have had since the 1930's.  but deflation is extremely painful.  and when it does occur, it means that people who have debts who  find their wages falling, see those debts as being even greater.  and anybody considering an investment has to understand that the dollar that they  actually have today, they're gonna need to earn an even  higher return on it going forward than they otherwise would.  this problem, this challenge of a deflationary environment when there's  a large amount of debt, being the only way that you can actually have an adjustment  after a shock, in one region is the reason that the european union or the eurozone,  what is now the eurozone area, is not a place that you would initially look at and  think they should have only one currency.  that's a structural weakness that's been in place since 1992.  it was effectively a bet on the part of the framers of the eurozone,  that they would be able to achieve a level of cultural unity and  of fiscal unity that would take place before they got hit by a large  enough shock that could break the entire union apart.  that bet wasn't necessarily a terrible bet if you factor in all of the political and  social reasons why such a union would be valuable.  but the fact of the matter is that that bet did not payoff and  in the end the shock came before the union came.  and we're now facing the effects of that shock.  [music] 
[music]  the eurozone crisis has many eerie parallels to another major  event of economic history.  and that is the great depression.  in order to understand what some of these parallels are,  we need a little bit of history on what the overall monetary system was in  the years leading up to the great depression.  and then i'll show you some pictures which will make these parallels seem very clear.  prior to world war i, almost all of the wealthy countries of the world were on  the gold standard, which is effectively a single currency for the entire world.  we had dollars in the united states.  there were pounds in england, francs in france.  but all of these currencies were fixed to gold and could be exchanged into gold  at a level that at least in great britain, had not changed for 200 years.  with these fixed levels, they're effectively all on one currency.  and there are a variety of reasons that this worked well over  the 50 year period or so, prior to world war i.  but it was an era of relative calm in international financial markets.  and that lead to a fairly strong belief among policy makers and  among central bankers, that the gold standard  led to this era of stability and helped create that stability.  during the war, all countries suspended convertibility into gold.  it was just not something that was feasible during the war and  there was a precedent for that.  as convertibility had been suspended in the past and then restore it after a war  most notably during the napoleonic wars of the previous century.  after the war, almost all of the countries went back on the gold standard, but  at that time relative prices across the countries were not properly aligned.  it was really viewed that going back on the gold standard and  going back at the parody, at the level that you had before world war i  was a symbol that you had recovered from the war.  and it was important for the moral and for the confidence in your countries to do it.  the problem was the war created a whole lot of imbalances, and  those imbalances were not addressed when these new prices were set.  this is much similar to what it looked like in europe when the euro was set  up just after german reunification in the early 1990s.  and the price levels across these different countries, because of differing  growths that that we saw throughout the 90s weren't quite right.  the misalignment of the relative prices set by the gold standard upon resumption  of that standard in the 1920s combined with an unwillingness to forgive  wartime debts or reparations set the stage for deep recessions across many countries.  following world war i, britain and france owed  an enormous amount of war debts to the united states, that were approximately  equal in magnitude to reparations that they were insisting upon from germany.  none of these debts and  reparations were forgiven, despite rounds and rounds of negotiations.  not that different from the types of rounds and  rounds of negotiations we see today in the eurozone, where well-meaning  participants had strong expectations of the way other countries should behave.  and when those expectations weren't met, did not yield and forgive those debts.  the recessions were then exacerbated by an almost moralistic fervor to stick  to the gold standard and its fixed exchange rates.  this commitment was the main contributor,  the central reason that there was a global propagation of the great depression.  ben bernanke, who was  the chair of the federal reserve board during the global financial crisis,  is perhaps the world's leading expert on this, and  on understanding what the propagation was of the great depression, and  the role that was played by the gold standard during this time.  that's a very important historical parallel, as the leaders,  at least in the united states, had a feel for this.  it's not obvious that there was a general consensus,  an understanding of just how bad this was and  how strong this parallel was by all of the leaders at the same time in europe.  and that turned out to be a major problem.  turning back to the gold standard and the great depression, here is some evidence.  the blue bars show us, in this particular case, the inflation and  deflation status in a country as a function of whether or  not that country was on the gold standard.  so a blue bar tells us they're on the gold standard and  a red bar tells us that they are off the gold standard.  the first year here is 1932.  in 1932, britain and the countries that were  following britain were no longer on the gold standard.  these countries began a recovery from the great depression.  and only had a small deflation left in 1932.  whereas, the country still on the gold standard, including the united states and  france, had significant deflation in these years.  much more significant than the deflation that we saw in ireland in 2011 and 2012.  in 1933, the deflation  in the countries off the euro zone you can't see because it was zero.  whereas we still have deflation in countries that are on the gold-standard.  it was 1933 when the united states went off.  the united states' price recovery began almost immediately.  in 1934, it is just france and  the countries that follow france that are still on the gold-standard.  these countries continue to see deflation through 1934 and  1935 until they finally left the gold-standard.  the countries off the gold-standard start to see inflation.  they're able to have an adjustment like iceland had an adjustment,  by having all of the prices and all of the wages in their country cut at once,  thus restoring their competitiveness.  we can see the same pattern by focusing on industrial production, which is the best  measure we have at this time of what we would now call gross domestic product.  again, the blue bars are showing us what industrial production growth  looks like in countries that are on the gold standard.  and the red bar tells us what is going on in countries that are off.  first, we see a 1932 where britain and  the countries that followed the pound are off the gold standard.  in that particular year, they still have negative growth, but  it is much lower than what we see for the countries that are on.  in 1933, it looks approximately the same.  this was a year of great upheaval when the united states was leading  the gold standard.  and then it's quite clear in 1934 and 1935 that there was a recovery in place.  growth is at levels of 12% for countries off of the gold  standard in 1934 and nearly 10% in 1935.  whereas countries that are still on the gold standard are continuing to struggle.  it's important to note here that leaving the gold-standard was not something that  was done out of strength, it was something that was done out of weakness.  so it was particularly countries that felt they were unable to sustain it.  it seemed something that they absolutely needed to do in order to be able to  survive, that left the gold-standard.  and it was precisely those countries, from that weakness,  that then had the fastest recoveries.  [music] 
[ music ]  >> hi. let's continue our discussion of the marketing mix.  the third p is placement.  this aspect of the marketing mix focuses  on making a product conveniently accessible  to potential customers.  for most products, placement involves the physical movement  of a product for manufacturer through a series  of marketing channel intermediaries ending typically  with an independent retailer.  the retailer then provides a number of important functions,  such as displaying the product upon the shelves  and educating its staff about the product's features  so they can help sell it to potential customers.  coke is a great example of a firm  that has effectively employed this aspect  of the marketing mix.  coke distributes its product, essentially its formula,  to a network of over 250 bottling partners  around the globe.  these distributors mix the coke formula with water, bottle it,  then ship these bottles or cans to a collection of warehouses,  which in turn distribute this product  to over 16 million retailers around the world  across more than 180 countries.  these retailers include, not only grocery stores,  but also convenience stores, restaurants, movie theaters,  and even vending machines.  indeed it is almost impossible to walk into a store  in most parts of the world and not be able  to buy a bottle of coke.  that's good placement.  now let's discuss a few key concepts  about the placement part of the marketing mix.  placement has a number of key concepts,  including inventory management, logistics,  and salesforce management.  in this module we'll focus on two fundamental concepts,  distribution and retailing.  first let's discuss distribution.  the distribution channel used  by most firms is typically outsourced to a series  of independent firms, such as an importer,  a wholesaler, and a retailer.  for example take a look  at the distribution channel for imported flowers.  as you can see the distribution process is often lengthy  and requires substantial resources in terms of both time  and money to properly manage.  each member of this channel is typically independent  from the other members, thus each participant is trying  to maximum their revenues and minimize their cost.  as a result, conflicts  and misunderstandings among channel members often arise.  so in order to properly manage this channel,  a manufacturer needs to carefully select  and closely monitor each of his channel partners.  this is a difficult and costly endeavor and typically drives  up the price of its products.  now let's take a look at retail.  the retailer is typically the final step  in the distribution chain.  selecting the number and type  of retailers is an important decision  because it affects the number and type of customers  that a firm can acquire for its products.  for example, firms that produce luxury goods  such as louis v tagne, employ intensive strategy  by making their products available at only a small,  exclusive set of retailers.  in contrast, lower priced consumer goods  such as toothpaste and shampoo typically employ a more  extensive placement strategy by making their products available  as many different retailers as possible.  retailers also vary considerably in terms  of degree of customer service.  some retailers such as convenience stores are largely  self-service operations where customers locate  and select products with nearly no assistance from the retailer.  in contrast, full-service retailers  such as high-end department stores take a more active role  in assessing a customer's needs and locating the right product  to satisfy those needs.  now let's talk about what's changing.  with a few exceptions such as dell computers,  most physical products are sold for an extensive network  of distributors and retailers.  these firms play important functions  by helping get this product in the hands of customers.  however these functions are not free.  typically a manufacturer only receives about 60-70%  of a product's final retail price.  thus, traditional product placement is an expensive  proposition for both firms and consumers.  this traditional approach is starting to break down due  to the rise of digital tools.  most firms are supplementing  or even bypassing physical retailers  by making their products directly available  at either an online retailer, such as amazon.com,  or on their own website.  this trend has been going on for some time  and online sales are growing rapidly.  in 2014 there was nearly $300 billion spent  on e commerce in the us alone.  even products that we traditionally want to touch  or try out at the store, are now being sold online.  a great example of this is casper,  which is a very innovative new firm  that sells mattresses exclusively online.  so the first time that a customer gets to try  out this mattress is after it's delivered in their home.  if a mattress can be sold online,  just about any product can bypass traditional  physical stores.  this growth of online retailing is probably not surprising  to most participants in this course.  however, what is probably surprising is the fact  that digital tools are not only capable  of replacing the retailer, but the entire distribution channel.  today, even large online retailers, such as amazon.com,  have to physically ship products  from the manufacturer to the customer.  however, newly emerging digital tools, such as 3d printers  and scanners, make it possible to eliminate the distributor  by allowing firms to ship a digital design rather  than a physical product.  a nice example of this is nokia,  which recently uploaded the design for a case  for its lumia smartphone  on the digital file sharing website, thingiverse.com.  anyone in the world can easily access this design and print it  out for free using affordable 3d desk top printer.  thus, in this new digital marketing environment,  we are now moving from long distribution channels  that transport physical goods to short distribution channels  that transport digital goods.  in this module we'll discuss how new digital tools  such as 3d printers are starting  to change how products are being distributed.  i think you'll find the discussion quite fascinating  that would alter the way you think  about this aspect of the marketing mix. 
>> hi. let's talk about price.  the last of the four piece is price.  this aspect of the marketing mix focuses on the amount  that a customer pays for a product.  price is different from the other three elements  of the marketing mix.  product, promotion,  and placement all create value for a customer.  instead price captures this value  and brings it back in to the firm.  thus having a good pricing strategy is critical  for your firm's profitability and basic survival.  the development of a pricing strategy is a complex decision  that entails lots of considerations,  including a product's cost of production,  what customers are willing to pay, and also the prices  of competing products.  for example, coke has traditionally employed a  competitive based pricing strategy.  over the years it has faced intense competition from pepsi  and other cola manufacturers.  thus coke has tried to match the price of its competitors.  today a can of coke is less than a dollar in the u.s.  and also many other countries.  thus it is very affordable for most consumers.  let's discuss a few key concepts.  the price portion of the marketing mix has lots  of interesting concepts such as break even analysis,  price elasticity, and reference prices.  in this module we'll focus on two fundamental concepts,  pricing strategy by firms and price knowledge among customers.  first let's discuss pricing strategy.  a pricing strategy is a firm's basic approach  to how it prices its products.  firms can employ a broad range of pricing strategies.  three of the most common are cost based pricing,  competitor based pricing, and value based pricing.  let me explain each briefly.  cost based pricing is a technique in which the price  of a product is based upon the cost of manufacturing  or acquiring this product plus a commonly accepted  markup percentage.  for example, in the u.s. most car dealers price their cars  at the invoice price plus a margin somewhere  between 5 to 10%.  competitor based pricing is a strategy in which the price  of a product is based on closely matching the price  of relevant competitors.  for example, if the price of a gas station, the price of gas  at a gas station, is lowered by one station,  nearby stations will typically lower the gas prices  to match its price.  finally, value based pricing is a strategy in which the focus is  on the added value  that a product provides to its customers.  and pricing that value appropriately.  for example, a cold soda  on a hot day during a sporting event is priced higher  and also provides more value than a soda sitting  on a store shelf a mile down the road.  now let's discuss price knowledge.  knowledge about prices is important  because this knowledge helps set price expectations  and also gives customers more power in the marketplace.  after all, knowledge is power.  academic research on this topic suggests  that for many product categories most consumers have a pretty low  level of knowledge about the prices they pay.  for example, one famous study  about consumer price knowledge found that less than half  of all supermarket shoppers know the price of items they place  in their shopping carts.  subsequent research has found  that although most customers don't have very accurate recall  of exact prices in short term memory, they are pretty good  at recognition of appropriate prices in long term memory.  in other words, although most consumers can't say how much  they pay for something when asked to name its price,  they can tell if the price of a product is close  to what they typically pay  in their normal shopping experience.  now let's talk about what's changing.  for most of the products we purchase the price has been set  by the firm that either makes it or sells it.  and we often don't know the exact price  until we see it on the shelf.  let me give an example.  i bought this bottle of coke at my local grocery store  for the price of $1.29.  i didn't know the exact price until i entered the store,  and this price certainly wasn't negotiable.  i actually asked if they would sell it to me for $1.00  and the store clerk looked at me rather strangely and said, "no.  that's not how it works."  this firm centered approach is starting to break down due  to the rise of digital tools.  for example, if you walked in to an electronics store looking  to buy a new television, you don't have to pay the price  that was listed on the shelf.  thus if a television was priced  at $1,000 you couldn't tell the manager  that you only wanted to pay $900 for it.  however if you used your smart phone to show the manager  that you could buy the same tv from amazon.com for $900,  he or she might be very likely to agree to this price.  indeed several large retailers have price matching strategies  in which they will match the price of competing retailers.  these price matching strategies are not completely new.  however before the rise of digital tools  such as the internet and the smart phone,  it was quite difficult for customers to engage  in this price search, this price matching activity.  in the past a cost conscious customer who wanted to ask  for a matching price had to search a variety of newspapers,  cut out the portion that showed a competing retailer's price,  and then bring this clipping to the store.  today this process is much, much easier.  armed with just a smart phone and a price search app  such as price grabber or red laser,  a customer can instantly compare prices  on a physical retailer's shelf with the prices  for the exact same product at amazon.com and a large number  of other online retailers.  all you really need to do is to show this price on your phone  to a store manager who is very likely to match this price  in order to get your business.  indeed in the u.s. several large retailers such as walmart,  target, and best buy, have an explicit policy  to match the price of online competitors.  thus in this new digital marketing environment we are  moving from prices revealed at the point of purchase  to prices negotiated at the point of consideration.  in this module we'll discuss how these new digital tools are  changing this element of the marketing mix  and altering how we think about price. 
[ music ]  >> hi. let's talk about product, the first of the four p's.  a product is really anything  that fulfills a customer need or want.  we usually think of a product as a tangible good,  such as a bottle of coke.  however, it can also be a service, or even an idea.  as we discussed earlier, in most categories,  there are multiple firms competing  for the same customers.  thus, in order to be successful,  a product must have a distinctive selling proposition.  in marketing, we refer to this, typically,  as a product's positioning.  this positioning can be functional,  based on actual product differences,  or symbolic based on a consumer need.  for example, coke.  this product fulfills our need for thirst as well as our desire  for belonging, as it it's positioned  as being an original; an iconic cola.  let's talk about a few key concepts in terms  of the product side of the marketing mix.  there are lots of concepts dealing  with product including things such as product quality,  managing a firm's product line, and product service support.  however, in this module we'll focus  on two fundamental concepts.  first of all, product development,  and second of all, brand management.  let's talk about product development.  innovation is viewed as a critical element  in the success of any product.  firms that are more innovative typically enjoy much greater  market success.  good examples of this are firms  such as apple, google, and netflix.  these firms create both new products,  but also new business models.  marketers typically refer to these types of firms as engaging  in what's known as disruptive innovation  and radically changing traditional business practices.  since these types of disruptive innovation are quite unusual,  most firms engage in what's known as incremental innovation.  this type of innovation focuses more  on improving existing products rather  than creating entirely new ones.  for example, over the past 50 years,  coke has been very successful in introducing a number  of extensions to its cola line through such products  as diet coke, or coke lite, coke zero, and cherry coke.  these type of line extensions can be quite helpful in terms  of having products that appeal to different target segments.  for example, diet coke is targeted towards women,  where coke zero was designed to be targeted towards men.  to develop these new products,  most firms employ a cross-functional team comprised  of managers from across different parts  of its business units including marketing, sales, operations  and r&d, among others.  typically, these team members follow a very carefully scripted  product development process such as the stage-gate method,  in which product development moves systematically  from conceptualization to launch in various stages--  usually 5 to 7 stages.  at each stage point, data is collected,  progress is monitored, and approval  from higher authority is sought.  this process is usually quite secretive in nature,  and those outside the firm have little direct involvement.  for example, during the stage-gate process,  consumer insights are solicited at only two points in the chain:  the beginning and the end.  moreover, because this process is meant to be confidential  in nature, only a few, select amount of consumers are asked  to provide input to these activities.  although these type  of development processes are well-established  and carefully managed, most new products still fail.  let's move on to our second concept: brand management.  we usually think of a brand as a name, a symbol,  or a design that differentiates one firm's products  from its competitors.  this differentiation can either be tangible differences  such as better taste, or intangible differences  such as a particular color.  for example, the coke brand is differentiated not only  by its name, but also by the script-- the font--  that it uses, and also the color red.  it owns that color in the cola category.  these types of strong brands help consumers decide what  to buy, and provides them not only with greater confidence,  but also with a sense of identity.  brands help tell us who we are.  they're also beneficial to firms,  as strong brand usually can charge higher prices,  enjoy greater loyalty, and experience higher profits.  this results in what marketers term "brand equity",  which is the value of a brand  over a generic product in the same category.  brand equity is a substantial  and tangible asset for many firms.  for example, coke's brand equity is estimated  to be worth over $80 billion.  that's billion with a b.  and this represents nearly 40 percent  of its total market value just for the brand alone.  given this high value placed on brand equity,  most firms place considerable emphasis  on building strong brands  by carefully choosing brand elements such as the name,  the color, and the brand's symbols.  firms also focus on building strong associations  to their brands through advertising campaigns,  and also protecting these investments through trademarks  and other forms of intellectual property protection.  usually, all of these brand functions are closely managed  by a brand management team whose sole job is  to manage the health of a brand.  this brings us to what's changing today  as a result of digital marketing.  what we're finding is both product development  and branding decisions are typically made  by a firm's brand managers with relatively little input  from customers or external entities in general.  for example, in the typical new product development process,  consumer input is solicited in only concept testing stage,  and the test market stage.  even then, typically only a small amount  of customers are asked to provide input.  so, what's changing now through digital marketing,  is that this firm-centered approach is starting to break  down due to the rise of these new digital tools.  for example, the chicago-based t-shirt manufacturer  threadless-- and we'll talk  about the threadless case shortly--  this company has no design staff at all.  all of its t-shirts are designed and selected  by its customers using a web-based platform  in which designs are submitted, viewed,  and voted upon all by its users.  thus, in this new digital marketing environment,  we're now moving from firm-created products and brands  to co-created products and brands.  in this module we'll discuss how this co-creating process is  changing how firms create products  and manage their brands.  i think you'll find this discussion to be eye-opening,  as it will likely change the way you think  about this aspect of the marketing mix. 
[ background music ]  >> hi. let's talk about promotion,  the second of the four p's.  this aspect of the marketing mix covers the methods  of communication that a marketer uses  to provide information about its product.  typically we think of this information as being persuasive  in nature with a goal of getting customers  to buy your product instead of its competitors.  this information can be both verbal and visual.  thus a promotional strategy can influence customers by appealing  to either their intellect or to their emotions.  for example, coke has built an incredible degree of awareness  and interest in its brand from a century  of effective promotional campaigns.  in 2013 alone coke spent 3.3 billion,  that's 3.3 billion u.s. dollars  on advertising, mostly on television.  so from 100 years of successful promotions coke is now one  of the world's most recognizable brands,  as the world's most popular soft drink.  as indication of this promotional success the word  coke is the second most recognized word  on the planet, just after okay.  that's impressive.  as you see on the screen here there's a history  of coke ads over these 100 years.  if you look at the link  on the course webpage you can see more details  about these ads.  if you look closely at these advertisements you'll see  that coke has historically focused more on visual  versus verbal information in an attempt  to build an emotional bond with its brand.  now that we've discussed what promotion is  and given an example let's talk about a few key concepts.  this portion of the marketing mix has a number  of important concepts including personal selling,  sales promotion and word of mouth.  in this module we're focused on two  of the most fundamental concepts of promotion;  that's advertising and persuasion.  let's talk about advertising first.  over the past 100 years the most popular promotional technique  has been advertising,  with television advertising accounting  for the largest portion of most firms' promotional budgets.  even today most firms still spend more on television ads  than they do on internet advertising.  let's take a couple of examples.  in 2013 walt disney spent $524 million on television ads  but only 140 million on internet advertising.  likewise toyota spent 959 million on television  but only 112 million on the internet.  most advertising, either internet or television,  is targeted towards either existing or potential customers.  however advertising can also be directed to other audiences  such as a firm's distribution partners, like retails,  or even to its employees to build morale  for its company and its brand.  regardless of the target the goal of advertising is  to elicit some type of response.  though different types of responses that a firm may seek,  for example, a new brand may focus on developing awareness  for its brand while an established brand may focus  on changing perceptions about itself.  most ads are carefully planned and carefully developed.  usually a firm will hire a professional advertising agency  to create an advertising campaign  and will careful pretest these ads before they're launched.  and then once after an advertising campaign is launched  a firm will usually have a professional marketing research  company track the ad to assess its effectiveness and decide  when it needs to develop a new campaign.  let's now switch to the topic of persuasion.  as noted earlier the primary goal  of any promotional campaign is to try to persuade customers  to buy a firm's products instead of its competitors' products.  thus marketers often think of promotion as a form  of persuasion and employ a number  of different persuasion tactics such as celebrity endorsements,  humor or scientific claims.  in order to understand how persuasion works academics had  to develop lots of different theories.  the most popular theory  about persuasion is what's called the elaboration  likelihood model or elm, which was developed in the 1970s  by a couple of scholars at ohio state university.  according to this model there are two main routes  to persuasion.  we have the central route and the peripheral route.  the idea is that the central route is cognitive  in nature while the peripheral route is more emotion in nature.  according to this theory the central route is effective  when customers have the ability and the motivation  to process a persuasion message and the persuasion occurs  when we find the information provided  to be both newsworthy and also believable.  in contrast the peripheral route is more effective  when customers lack the ability and motivation  to process a message and occurs when we perceive the provider  of the message to be either credible or attractive.  these two ads from carl's jr, which is a restaurant chain  in the u.s., are good examples  of these two different persuasion routes.  as you can see one is much more focused on the message.  the other is more focused on the provider of the message.  regardless of which route is employed persuasion tactics  focus on trying to convince customers  that a product is appealing and based on the premise  that a firm just needs to find the right message  or the right message provider to be effective.  that's what we usually think about promotion.  so what's changing?  well historically most large firms have devoted most  of their promotional budget to advertising,  and most of this advertising expenditures went  to television advertisement, which was developed  by professional advertising agency.  and although a small number of customers are asked  to provide their opinions about these ads through techniques  such as concept testing, this process is largely top  down in focus and most ads are designed to persuade a customer  to buy a firm's products by first getting attention  for its brand and then persuading them to purchase it.  that's the traditional model.  now this top down approach is starting to break down due  to the rise in digital tools.  for example, jones soda has built a successful franchise,  and here's a bottle of jones soda,  not through television advertising.  in fact it spends no money on advertising at all,  has a very small advertising budget.  instead its entire promotional campaigns are created  by its customers.  this includes television ads that are shown  on youtube, for example.  but also the label for its soda.  so all of its labels are sent in,  are photographs sent in by its customers.  now this particular photograph shows an ice cream vendor  on a beach and it was sent  by a person named michelle blackburn in indiana.  and if you see on the side  of this soda this company expresses this strong ethos  of using customer content to promote its product.  so they say send us your photo,  if we like it we'll put it on our label.  and that's what they do.  in this new digital marketing environment we are moving  from managed messages designed to persuade  to authentic messages designed to narrate or tell a story.  in this module we'll discuss how new digital tools are changing  this element of the marketing mix  and redefining how we think about promotion. 
[ music ]  >> hello. welcome to our first campus spotlight.  i'm here today with allan craig.  allan's a [inaudible], but for many years worked  as a research scientist for the national center  for super computer applications, did i get that right?  >> national center for super computing applications.  >> okay, thank you.  and that's here?  >> here at the university of illinois.  >> and allan is one of the world's leading experts  in the domain of augmented reality  which i think i know a little about  but i'm sure you'll tell me a lot more.  >> so, over the course  of the past several decades i've been involved in the space  and we've used these super computers  to simulate model the real world  as digital simulations and recreations.  >> okay, well what sort of things have you,  what part of the world have you been looking at?  >> so, largely that part of things has been with,  so if i'm a chemist and i'm interested  in studying how chemicals interact maybe drugs in a body  so they can write simulation codes and do the experiments  in the computer instead  of in the real world sometimes you can't do them  in the real world.  >> sure.  >> sometimes you can just do more experiments that way.  weather prediction, earthquake forecasting,  all those sorts of things.  >> okay, great.  and can you tell us a bit more about what augmented reality is  and what sort of things you've been doing with this technology?  >> right, so augmented reality is a new medium  for communication.  it's technologically based.  i like to separate off the notion  that it's a communication medium from the fact  that there's technology involved because i think  if we look too closely at just the technology we'll miss what  the medium of augmented reality can do.  so, i'm interested in exploring the edges of what the medium  of augmented reality can do, so what i'm interested  in is there seems to be right now a lot  of these virtual worlds are in digital space,  so there's this chasm, there's the digital world  and then there's the physical world and so things  like virtual reality we leave the physical world and we go  into the digital world.  with augmented reality i don't want to do that,  i want to merge the physical world and the digital world.  >> so, lately we've been hearing a lot  about this oculus rift, these, these.  >> exactly.  >> these, um.  >> head-mounted displays, yeah.  >> so, would that be virtual reality or augmented reality?  >> well, again, that would be one technological instance  for supporting the medium of virtual reality,  so with the oculus and things  like that basically i'm shunning the real world  and stepping inside so basically it's sucking me  into the digital world.  augmented reality on the other hand,  we've got this digital information  but we're physical creatures,  we're out here in the real world.  you've got a body, we've got a table here,  instead of shunning that, leaving that.  >> yeah.  >> putting on and going into fully digital world,  let's bring the best of the digital world and apply it  to the best of the physical world and that's  where augmented reality.  >> so, in other words you're merging the virtual  with the physical?  >> exactly.  >> okay, good.  and can you give us a few examples of applications  of this you've been working on recently?  >> sure. so, one of the obvious things  to do is for example a book.  this is a magazine that the national center  for super computing applications puts out and we wanted to.  >> so, this is just a regular magazine?  >> yeah, it's just a regular magazine.  >> and this is one i would get in the mail or buy at a store?  >> exactly.  >> it's perfectly flat.  >> yeah, it's just; this is standing in for any book.  >> it's perfectly flat and.  >> yeah.  >> it could be a time magazine or?  >> exactly.  >> or a sport illustrated?  >> exactly.  >> okay.  >> and there's something really nice about a physical entity.  i can feel it, i can maneuver it.  i know if it's right-side up or upside down,  i can flip to the back, i can flip to the front.  you know, we've got things like this and we can read  that same magazine on here, but we lose some  of that tactile sense, that sense of our own body has a,  you know, we've got our five senses that we learned  in grade school, right, our eyes, ears, nose,  our tongue, and our touch, right?  but, we actually have more senses than that,  one is our sense of proprioception  and that's how our body knows how it's configured.  >> and what does that mean?  >> our sense of proprioception is  that we know how our body is configured at any given moment.  so, if you would close your eyes,  you can take you right finger and touch it to your left toe  without seeing it, hearing it, smelling it, tasting it,  or anything because your body knows how it's configured  and we're stripping ourselves of that sense when we're looking  at things here, for example,  if i close my eyes i can flip this upside down  and bring it right back  up because me arms are telling me how i'm configured.  >> okay.  >> so, that's one of the things i'm trying to capture back  in doing these experiments.  >> so, in other words your physical body is providing you  with information of the environment.  >> ah hum, exactly.  so, what i can do as a technological stand-in,  books are good for certain kinds of things, but they're not good  for showing 3-dimensional objects, they're not good  for showing time varying objects, but with the idea  of augmented reality i can take this magazine  and i can look through, i'm using the ipad here  as a magic lens to see the book and we're going to pull  down some digital content and we see now  that there's a 3d dinosaur on the page of the book.  >> so, dinosaurs come to life and.  >> right, and i can interact with them,  see my physical finger there?  he'll snap at me or i can tickle him behind his feet  and he'll run, there we go.  so, that brings this digital dinosaur  into our physical space, see he's on the magazine here.  i can do other things like that.  i can show some other kinds of data here.  i've got this magazine can come to life and we hear  and see a video running in place right  in registration with the magazine.  >> well, so what other things can we do  with augmented reality?  >> well, i've been doing experiments  with different media forms.  let me show you another example that came  from the daqri company just so i can show this to you here.  i've got this foam rubber block.  >> so, this is just a block of foam.  a block of foam that has looks  like some gears on it and a name.  >> that's their company name daqri.  >> daqri.  >> right.  >> and there's some different images  and just normal foam cube.  >> right. and so.  >> so, it looks like it wouldn't cost that much to produce.  >> right. the idea, but this is just a stand-in  for anything in the real world.  >> could be anything okay.  >> now, the designs help the computer vision algorithm  to recognize this object.  >> so, that's being for example like a billboard or?  >> sure, exactly.  a billboard would be exactly the same as the magazine.  >> or a bus stop advertisement?  >> sure. absolutely.  it could be a salt shaker or a mug or something like that  or a piece of an engine, right?  because we could then lay digital information  on an engine, but what, again, looking through the magic lens  with this we can see, you can see  that this has become a clock.  a clock.  >> so, i can see your hand.  >> right, you can see my hand holding it.  >> that's your hand.  >> and you can see inside the block and see the gears turning.  >> so, it looks like your hand.  >> and you can see the display.  >> now, this is very different.  >> right, right, exactly.  it's completely taken over this object and we can click on it  and make it a different representation.  here's a different kind of clock and, again,  this is coming from daqri.  we can use different media too.  here's a t-shirt that we did with the vet school here  at the university of illinois.  >> so, this is an ordinary t-shirt.  >> right.  >> with a.  >> their moto is science with a heart.  >> science with a heart.  >> and so what we did was we used the magic lens and now  if you look at the t-shirt  through the magic lens you can see the heart beating  and of course it's beating orange and blue  for the university of illinois.  >> wow, that's really cool.  that's really cool.  any companies that have come to you  to do something similar for advertising?  >> oh, yes, yes, yes.  various companies have, and there's companies  out there doing these sorts of things.  we've seen advertising campaigns that, for cars.  i've seen advertising campaigns for movies.  i've seen advertising campaigns for coffee and things like that.  so, there's that, so we're getting to this notion  of digital marketing, right?  >> right.  >> so, there's what i consider an advertising campaign  but there's this whole issue of marketing  where it's not necessarily considered an advertisement  but just there's content in the world  and that's the brand message and i'm not a business guy  so i don't want to speak and say things i shouldn't be saying,  but to me all of a sudden now instead  of having a tv advertisement or a web advertisement  or a newspaper advertisement the whole world is your medium  and your message can be anywhere, anytime,  in context with the real world.  now that can lead to all sorts of crazy things going on right?  as you and i are walking down the street or walking  through the mall there could be digital entities beckoning us  to come in the store and we could just be overwhelmed  with all this content, but that's one  of the things i'm interested in is how can we ensure  that your goals and desires as the consumer  that you're getting the content that you want  and not being bombarded by content you don't care about  and then that would put the onus back on the content provider  to give you with meaningful content that goes along  with the products and ideas that you're interested in.  and what you see, and hear, and feel, and touch doesn't have  to be the same thing that i do.  >> so, you can customize.  >> exactly.  >> to my demographic profile.  >> exactly.  >> my shopping behaviors.  >> sure. whatever you want it to be.  >> so, do it will reach a point and the not too distant future  where it would be hard to distinguish the physical reality  from the augmented version?  >> that's a really interesting question  because we're already sort of at that point because when we go  into a movie, right, we're experiencing this virtual world  and some of that was created by capturing the real world,  some of it was created straight  out of the computer and those are mixed.  >> and it's, it's.  >> outside of real-time.  >> it's hard to tell the difference.  >> to make the movie and you don't necessarily know was  that ship, a film of a real ship or was  that a computer generated ship model  when you're looking on the screen.  >> very cool.  >> so, to now bring that out into the real world in real-time  and interactive with you  and that's what we'll be experiencing.  if i've got say my car, and i want to change my oil in my car.  >> yeah.  >> i can have a manual that i look at and change the oil  in my car or i can just go to the car  and if it can say unscrew this screw right here and show me how  to do that right in place so i don't have to look away  from the car and then it tells me now pull this out,  put this in.  >> yeah.  >> um, then that becomes a real value.  >> so, my car engine would talk to me?  >> and show you things.  >> show me things.  >> yeah.  >> now, is this, would this really happen, is it realistic?  >> this is realistic down the line, yes.  >> how many years are we talking about?  >> oh, um a handful i think.  >> a handful, 10, 15?  >> oh, yeah i think in the next 10 years we'll be seeing  that kind of.  >> really?  really?  >> that kind of thing for sure.  >> yeah.  >> and new devices are coming out every day in terms  of glasses, and things like that.  the daqri company that i have mentioned already they have a  hardhat kind of a, a hardhat i'm not sure that's the right word  but a helmet that's meant for factory floor workers  so that they get that assistance on the floor in the factory.  they can read gauges from across the room;  they can see instructions, that sort of thing.  >> so, this is happening already.  >> this is happening right now.  >> okay, yeah, great.  fantastic.  you spoke a bit about the marketing implications already.  as you know this course is part  of a specialization on digital marketing.  >> right.  >> so, can you say a bit more about the future  of digital marketing and the how,  when reality fits into that future?  >> yeah, okay.  so, of course any medium can be used  to communicate a message, right?  >> yeah.  >> now, i'm going to differentiate again  between virtual reality and augmented reality  because there's the potential  for that marketing communication to be made in both.  virtual reality at least as i in my world view, you go to it  and you do it for a certain period of time,  like you go to a movie, right, you go to vr like i need to,  i want play a game so i'll go into virtual reality  or i'm going to experience this thing.  i go into it and i come back out.  >> when you're done, you're done.  >> yeah, when you're done you're done for a while.  augmented reality has the potential  of being a 24/7 thing, right?  so, as i'm in the world this digital content will just become  part of my everyday world and so i think in terms  of marketing what that means is we need to stop thinking  about advertising as well or marketing materials, as well as,  being something that you go to for an instant  but it's something that's just in our world with us  and so it needs to be something that's compelling.  >> yeah.  >> in our own world just on an everyday basis, right?  and to me hopefully that means value added.  >> now, that's very interesting,  so many people view marketing especially advertisers  as an intrusion.  >> right.  >> so, we have, you know, divo right?  >> right, yeah.  >> is that right divo?  what am i talking about?  >> the tivo.  >> tivo, tivo thank you.  we have tivo and we have other ways of blocking.  >> yeah.  >> by simply getting up  and getting a drink in the refrigerator.  >> right.  >> so, what i hear you saying is that become, marketing becomes  in this setting of augmented reality a less intrusion,  less of a commercial more of the programming.  >> i'm hoping that that's the way it is, right?  and that's up to the people that are developing this content  and somewhat as an ar developer how we allow people  to communicate their message, but hopefully they'll recognize  that they don't want to be an intrusion.  if i can go to product a and it's got this extra content  with it that's going to help me, you know, like change the oil  in my car things like that, that is going to draw me  in to that product, right?  >> okay.  >> me personally, if it's popping an add up for  that automobile while i'm, every time i see one saying  "don't you want to buy one these?"  to me that's an intrusion.  >> sure.  >> right? so, i think we need  to change how we view our marketing.  maybe that's already what the world is like.  >> in terms of keeping up,  are there any websites that you follow?  >> well, i think probably the most compelling things are the  various company websites out there.  some of the companies i've mentioned daqri,  that's daqri, so their website.  there's companies like metaio  or aurasma those are some of the big ones.  i've got a book out called  "understanding augmented reality"  and a website understanding augmented reality.  >> what's your web address allan?  >> understanding augmented reality.com.  >> one word.  >> one word.  it's a big long word, yeah.  >> okay. okay and our participants would  like to perhaps contact you.  >> sure.  >> best way is your website?  >> um, probably email is the best way, allanbcraig@gmail.com.  >> great. wonderful.  thank you so much.  >> or through you, yeah.  they can reach me through you too.  >> we'll find you.  >> thanks.  >> okay, thank you allan.  >> thanks. 
[ background sounds ]  [ music ]  >> hi. today we're here at the siebel center  for computer science here at the university of illinois.  >> the siebel center was built in 2004.  thomas siebel donated $32 million to the university  of illinois for this building.  currently, the building houses the university  of illinois computer science department which is one  of the top five computer science departments in the nation.  >> great. today we're here to speak  with professor hari sundaram.  hari's new to the university of illinois.  he holds joint departments, both in the department  of computer science and also the department of advertising.  hari does cutting edge research on how digital tools  such as smart phones can be used to change  and influence human behavior.  you ready jolie?  >> yeah, let's go.  >> let's go.  [ music ]  we're here with hari sundaram.  hari, thank you for the opportunity  to visit with you today.  >> my pleasure.  >> can you tell us a little bit about yourself  and the work that you do?  >> sure. i'm an associate professor in computer science  and i have a joint appointment with computer science  and advertising and-- but my primary appointment is  in computer science, so much of my work deals  with analyzing collective behavior in online networks.  so, an example of this would be how do you discover  group formation.  what's technically in computer sciences we call  community discovery.  how do you discover groups that form online?  and some of the other problems that we have looked at is  that how do you discover the rise of coordinated behavior.  so, i don't know if you'd noticed that sometimes  when on facebook if there's a like on a particular post,  the next time you log in there are literally hundreds of likes.  it's almost as though all  of this is happening simultaneously.  so, how do you discover the rise of coordinated behavior?  it'd be a building of mobile network laboratory.  that is, a laboratory that runs on people's smart phones.  so, the idea is that if you want  to understand how people make decisions in the presence  of social signals, that is,  knowing what your friends are doing at this particular time,  if you want to understand how people react to messaging  in situ, like if you go to walmart  and you see a particular message,  how will people make a decision then.  you need to have infrastructure that allows you  to measure reactions  to different circumstances or contexts.  so, that's the kind-- so i'm interested in networks  in general, outside of facebook and twitter.  so, for example, there's a lot of research  in behavioral psychology that suggests  that when individuals make decisions we are influenced  by decisions of our friends as well as people  with whom we can relate to.  so, for example, as a trivial example, if i am walking  in downtown chicago and i walk past an indian restaurant  and i see the restaurant with a lot of other people  from india eating there, then it's a cue  that perhaps these people find value in this restaurant  and i should join them, even though i don't know them.  so, i'm trying to make use of this--  of these principles from behavioral psychology as part  of my research in how people take decisions  in social networks.  >> ok.  >> i was just going to ask if this primarily focuses  on social media then because you had mentioned facebook  and twitter and all these different--  >> yeah, it does.  so, it began-- a lot of my work begin  with deep interest in social media.  i was interested  in understanding how people cooperate online.  how do-- you know, how does meaning form  through consensus online.  so, that's how it began, but then i began to realize  that networks play a much--  a really important part in our lives.  if you begin to think of networks,  not just facebook or twitter--  >> ok.  >> but in terms of friendships, right?  all of us have had friendships for millennia.  i mean, human beings have--  the bases of human society are these strong relationships  that exist between the individuals.  if you start thinking of networks as preexisting outside  of social media, then you begin to ask yourself how is it  that individual decision-making is affected  by these relationships.  >> and you mentioned that these relationships may be formed  around a common affinity,  so could that be a brand, a product?  >> could be.  it could be, for example, all those people  who like the new york times, for example.  so, it could be that many of the people  who read the new york times have many other attributes,  perhaps all of them are liberal, for example,  or some of them have higher incomes that allow them  to have affinity with each other.  >> ok. how about things like automobiles,  so things like jeep is known  for having a strong brand community, for example.  >> sure. absolutely.  so, yes. you can definitely form interest groups  where you can join groups whereby, you know,  you profess an interest for that brand  and all the different dimensions that the brand entails.  >> ok. so, i know you're doing this cutting edge research,  do we see any firms that are utilizing these techniques  to help market their products?  >> so, many of the-- so all this stuff that i'm doing is still  in its infancy, even outside.  so, people are very interested in using social media  for marketing purposes, for example.  it's been widely-- for example, it's been widely used in terms  of product placements on blogs, for example.  it's been used in wire marketing whereby, you know,  individuals go to bars or hotels or other places and they profess  to be using a particular product.  the big question that i'm trying to address is the question  of how do we persuade millions of individuals  to adopt behaviors that are beneficial to them, right?  an example would be can one reduce their energy consumption.  all of us are interested  in leading a more healthy lifestyle, right?  so, if we can persuade people to adopt more healthy behaviors,  it would have a huge impact on society, right?  not only would people lead healthier lives,  they would lead more productive lives.  as a direct consequence,  insurance rates will fall, right?  if you start thinking about reducing our energy footprint,  you know, it will have a huge impact,  cascading impact on sustainability.  right? so, that is the framing from which i come from.  so, when you think about authenticity in that context,  i'm interested in having people sign up for networks  for behaviors that they want to adopt,  but somehow can't seem to manage.  i want to eat healthy, but for whatever reason i happen  to be eating more steaks every week than i should, right?  how do i persuade myself to be more healthy?  so, what my goal is to embed you in a network of friends  and people that you can relate to and you will start now  in my network you'll start seeing messages.  promotional messages perhaps from businesses,  but also messages from your friends saying that--  an example of this message would be  that hari, it's 11 a.m. today.  i know you're about to go eat lunch, but 7 out of 10  of your friends have just gone to eat a salad.  >> so, you'd get this message on your phone--  >> on your phone, yes.  >> it would pop up on the screen.  >> it would pop up on the screen and so these are the kinds  of nudges that slowly help you attain the behaviors  that you want.  >> so, how does this work?  how does this message on my screen nudge my behavior  to eat healthy versus have--  >> so, the idea is that you're connected, so you're going  to be influenced by the people that you see.  so, if it is your friends who are adopting the behavior,  then it's more likely that you will adopt this behavior.  or if it's people that you admire or have an affinity with,  you're much more likely to adopt the behavior.  so, there's a lot of research that talks about, you know,  if there-- based on the social norms,  knowing the social norms makes a big difference.  >> so, the social norms, perhaps peer pressure?  >> peer pressure, but social norms make a big difference.  so, this familiar towel study--  i don't know if you're familiar with this.  in this towel study, what they did is  that they put these messages inside hotel rooms  that said that-- and these statistics were true,  they said 75% of the people who have stayed  in this room have reused the towel.  >> i've seen these signs.  >> that's right.  this is partly due to the work of robert cialdini,  who's worked extensively in persuasion.  this is-- the adoption statistics roles.  so, that's the idea.  so, if you begin to understand what the social norms are,  what is it that your friends are doing, what is it that people  like you are doing, might you be more inclined to adopt?  >> as you mentioned, this desire for collective action  and belonging is, you know, is a deep human trait  and that these behaviors and these social norms  and peer pressure also, you know, quite old.  so, what is new here in terms of the digital side?  so, how are these digital tools  like the smart phone changing these very traditional,  you know, human traits and motives?  >> i think the biggest difference is scale.  so, so far, if you think about the role of computing in many  of these complex human questions--  these are not computer science questions,  these are human questions that intersect, you know, psychology,  economics, and now technology.  so, what has particularly changed in the last 10  or 15 years-- 2 things have happened.  one is that the cost  of communication has dramatically reduced.  people have access to devices  that are essentially full-fledged computers,  a.k.a. smart phones, right?  and i think the other thing that has happened is  that technologies such as flickr and facebook,  flickr and twitter, what they've shown us is the extraordinary  desire for humans to be with each other, right?  be online.  you know, this desire to connect with other people.  we've always known this, but facebook has shown to the extent  at which we seek this.  right? so, i think the key to technology is i think going  to play an increasing role as a glue in solving some  of these big complex questions  that humanity has found itself confronting.  >> so, as you know, this course is called marketing  in a digital world, we talked  about the digital aspect just now, how about a bit  about the marketing side?  so, [inaudible] this as a tool for social good,  like sustainability and healthy eating and energy usage.  how do you envision firms using this  or consumers using these tools to change marketplace behavior?  >> so, excellent question.  so, for example, consider this idea that, you know,  i've joined the social networking app to promote--  so that i become more healthy.  right? so, i have a vested interest  in becoming more healthy, right?  and i'm-- now, let's say the marketplace knows this in terms  of businesses know that, you know what,  hari has a tendency to eat healthy.  he walks at siebel center.  can i incentivize him to come to my restaurants, make him aware  of the kind of products that are available, for example,  dishes that are available in my restaurant  that he can partake that is healthy?  so, first is promotional messages that can come  to me when i'm nearby.  second thing is the cascading effect of being healthy, right?  so, let's say i adopt these healthy behaviors  and i've become more healthy.  i call my insurance company and say look,  i've really adopted a healthy behavior, healthy lifestyle.  cut my insurance.  so, naturally the insurance company's going to come around  and say where's the proof?  it's like, i'm not going to believe you.  and a very important aspect  of my work is behavior verification.  so, i claim that i've done something and can i prove  to another person that what i claim is accurate.  now, if the insurance companies know that hari is very healthy,  leads a very healthy lifestyle, goes to bed early,  sleeps adequate number of hours and so on,  they might cut my insurance rate.  so, you-- i think you'll start to see--  provided individuals are willing  to expose their behavioral history in return for some sort  of a, you know, cut in prices,  you'll see a very interesting dynamic taking place  between businesses and individuals now.  >> so, going back to what you were saying before,  i think privacy might be one of the issues with social media  and digital marketing and all of that,  but you said people would be migrating more to perhaps show,  you know, companies their behavior.  why do you think they're going to make that change?  >> well, only in response for some sort  of an advantage, right?  so, this-- we're already seeing this.  for example with progressive, an insurance company,  car insurance company, now puts in small monitors  in individuals' cars, right?  now, in response for good driving behavior,  progressive says that it'll give you a cut  in your insurance rate.  so, only if i believe that the company  that wants my behavioral profile will give me some sort  of a price cut, but i totally agree with you.  in return, it also has to say that it will honor my privacy.  it will not resell my data to somebody else  without my permission.  >> can you give us a demonstration of how this works?  >> i'll be glad to.  so, what this dashboard allows us to do is that it allows us  to configure and generate apps that have a very specific focus.  so, this infrastructure allows us  to create social networking apps that are across platform,  across android, iphone, and windows mobile,  and what it allows--  this particular dashboard shows the experimental configuration.  so, you know, experimenter could create a database,  could select classes to be created, could select things  like what kind of network topology they want and,  you know, and add any special cases as they need.  for example, in this case a friend.  they could also configure things like what to show for any user.  so, you know, you could have thresholds.  what kind of thresholds do you want to use to trigger positive  or negative messages, number of messages per day,  any particular time messages ought to be displayed,  and things like if you're trying to understand the relationship  between messages and influence, so as i discussed earlier,  we need to start thinking in terms of positive  and negative framing of information.  so, begin figure out which users are part  of the experimental group who get positive messages,  who get negative messages, and the control group  that gets neutral messages.  and there are some other features here  that allow an experimenter to think  about message display based on granularity including, you know,  time, including space, as well as network.  so, the first app that we've created  with that infrastructure is an app  that focuses on healthy living.  so, the idea is that you want to persuade people  to have healthy eating and exercising behaviors and we want  to run a controlled experiment that begins  to understand the effects of different kinds  of information framing, the different kinds  of network structures that persuade people  to eat healthy and exercise, right?  so, we created this app.  so, what you do is that you login with facebook  and it's a pretty standard procedure.  you'd find this on many different apps.  so, this is an example of sanjana  who is enjoying a apple danish.  so, if you go down, this is my breakfast for today.  i'm also eating the same apple danish.  you can like if you want, you can enter a comment, and,  you know, and the friends  in my network have entered these comments.  so, if you go down, you'll find that you'll see activities  of people in your network who have posted things  about where they've gone and what they have--  photographs of what they've eaten  and so what we also have are these informational messages  that attempt to persuade you to subtly change your behavior.  so, for example, this one says  if you're a serious grad student, this would be  of most relevance to you.  it says four out of seven serious grad students have eaten  healthy over the past week.  you get some other statistics like 63 out of 100 of the people  in the network have eaten in north urbana,  so this is an example of a special aggregate.  so, all these messages  that you're right now are positive healthy messages  and that's because i'm part of the control group  that gets these positive messages, right?  so, you can go down and you can see, you know, other messages.  for example, this particular message says  that if you have a very large network, if you and your network  on average walk 62,000 steps you'd have collectively walked a  full circle.  of course, here my network is extraordinarily large,  so that is actually possible.  so, you go down and you know you get other kinds  of statistics as well.  you also, for example, you also get tabular information.  we selected tables in part because graphs are very hard  to read on a smart phone.  it's very easy to generate a graph, but it's very hard  to read the statistics and, you know, we allow you  to generate graphs here.  so, what else can you do?  you can obviously-- again, it's a social network,  you can take photographs of food that you've eaten.  so, in this particular application,  the idea is that you decide-- so you decide to--  what you do is that you several things.  in this particular application you do several things.  you figure out how much money you want to spend.  ok, so in this particular case, if i want to spend only $9,  i would have this setting.  and i have this setting that says vegetarian  and so the minute setting is very interesting.  for example, if i set it to 60 minutes,  it means that the application should give me restaurants  or suggest restaurants to me where i can find food for less  than $9 and i can be back in my office within 60 minutes.  right? so, i save these preferences and then  when i do a search, i can--  immediately i have restaurant suggestions  that are based upon my preferences  and as you can see many of these restaurants are close by.  there, you know, for example, don juan cocina is  within five minutes and the average cost of something  that i can eat there is around $6, right.  now, for example, then if choose don juan's cocina mexicana  and cantina, i get this nice map that i can just post  and say that i'm going.  ok? so, once i say i'm going, then my entire network gets  to see this information.  it says that hari is going to don juan cocina mexicana  and cantina and so my network is informed, right?  and then once i got to my network, i go there  and in this application you're supposed to take a photograph  of the food that you've eaten which you post, right?  so, in our network, you get points only  if you take photographs of what you've eaten.  now, of course it's very hard to take--  to understand from a photo if the photo is healthy or not,  so at the back end we have another framework that farms  out these photographs to other members of the network  who don't really know that it is hari who has posted,  so they will anonymously rate this food,  that actually gives me a healthy rating  of whether i've eaten healthy or not.  so, the key point about this infrastructure is  that it allows us to rapidly prototype a wide variety  of applications, not just for health,  but we are also developing an application for public safety.  you can also have an application for entertainment.  the key idea is making apps that have a specific purpose  that solves a problem that people actually have.  once you create such apps that are engaging, at the back end,  the experimenter can run small experiments  to understand the effects of different kinds of messaging,  different kinds of topologies, different kinds of, you know,  of settings such as, for example, what happens  if at 11 a.m. you get a push notification on your smart phone  that says 7 out of 10 of your friends are eating a  salad today.  so, it's very hard to evaluate these questions  on existing social networks like twitter or facebook  because we don't really have full control of what members  of the network see and when they see it.  >> it's 2014; where are we in 10 years  down the road, [laughter] 2024, 25?  >> it's hard to predict the future, but i'm going  to use a quote from one of my favorite authors,  william gibson, who said that the future has already happened.  it's just unevenly distributed, right?  so, i think the biggest thing that we will see is  that we will see technology transform mundane things.  we'll see transform things like adoption  of large-scale behaviors like becoming more healthy.  >> looking at technology, here you have a demonstration of,  you know, the smart phone.  what other tools, digital tools, might play a role  in this future that you've laid out?  >> so, i think an important part of it is  that when i say technology is infused everywhere,  i mean that it could be in the very fabrics that we wear.  so, i think wearables will become much more important.  they may not become prominent necessarily as prominent as the,  you know, forthcoming apple watch.  it could be, for example, some of the fibers woven  into your shirt and that could be tracking things  like heart rate, it could be tracking things like, you know,  whether you're breathing properly.  right? obviously, the world wide web will continue  to play a very important role in terms of connecting people.  >> certainly.  >> very fascinating stuff.  where would someone go to find out more information  about the work that you're doing?  >> so, the best, best place would be my website.  would be sundaram.cs.illinois.edu  or they should get in touch with me over email.  >> great. thank you so much!  we appreciate your time.  >> thank you.  thank you so much. 
[ music ]  >> hi. we're here on the engineering campus  at the university of illinois.  we're inside the material research laboratory to talk  with professor john rogers about his fascinating work  on wearable electronics.  >> the rogers research group consists of over 40 students,  undergraduates, graduate students  and post-doctoral students who are conducting research  on nano materials and their applications to electronics.  so some of the interesting projects that they're working  on right now include dissolvable circuits  and 3d printed electronics,  all of which have really interesting implications  for digital marketing.  >> did you say dissolvable circuits?  >> yes, i did.  >> let's go find out more.  >> alright.  john, thanks for meeting with us today.  >> yeah, thanks for having me.  >> so a bit about the work that you're doing  and it's applications.  >> yeah, sure.  so i'm a electronic materials scientist.  so we're interested in new kinds of materials that can be used  for integrated circuits or [inaudible] devices,  various types and so on.  and one of the areas that we've been focusing  on over the years is trying to adapt electronics to enable sort  of highly intimate,  highly functional interfaces with the human body.  if you think about consumer electronics that exist today,  it's largely plainer and rigid and brittle in its construction.  and that's a reflection of the fact  that all integrated circuits that have every been built  and sold commercially have been farmed on the surfaces  of [inaudible] which essentially have properties of plated glass  and are very thin and brittle.  and that's great for a cellphone, you want to put it  in your pocket, you don't necessarily need to bend it.  but if you want a highly functional interface  to the human body, you need a whole different setup,  geometrical, mechanical properties.  because the skin, the heart, the brain,  i mean they have contoured surfaces and soft materials.  and so if we can work out how  to configure electronic devices generally to enable that kind  of interface with the body, with the idea  that the successful outcome  in that direction could really profoundly the way we think  about human healthcare.  >> so i know you mentioned that you know,  these things could lower the cost of healthcare.  is it because the materials are cheaper?  how does that work?  >> well, so you know, there is a cost to the device, right.  so not everybody's wearing a health monitor right now.  i mean i think that's a vision in the future.  so at one very basic level you say oh that's increasing the  cost because now everybody has to buy a health monitor  where in the past they've never used before.  but the idea is that if you are wearing this health monitor  and patch it allows you to catch disease stakes far earlier  and so it allows preventative care  that has a huge beneficial impact on the cost  because the procedural costs are not so high  if you catch it early.  so that would be the rationale.  it's a relatively modest upfront cost with a huge benefit  down the line in terms of overall health.  >> john, you know a really interesting part,  there's a theme in our course that we're seeing  through this digital revolution that the tools  that were once held by the few and were very large  and expensive, are now available to many  and they're smaller and much cheaper.  and as a result we're seeing consumer,  and in perhaps this case patients,  taking more control in the marketplace.  could you speak about that,  maybe how that might change the nature  of the healthcare marketplace.  >> yeah, so it's an interesting question.  i don't know exactly how to predict the future.  one school of thought is these devices will allow you  to personalize your health.  so you will have access to all this data.  you can sort through it and you can modify your diet  or exercise more or less.  you can figure out if you're sleeping well  and getting enough sleep and so on.  i don't know that that sort  of mindset is widespread in society.  my guess is probably not.  that most people, even if they had access to the information,  might not be sufficiently motivated to track  and understand it and study it and try to behave,  do behavior modification based on it.  there will be some fraction,  but i don't think that's the majority of folks out there.  i think that these devices are most valuable  when they're coupled with informatics and sort  of a big data system that can automatically sort through a lot  of this stuff, reduce all of these complex data screens  to meaningful initial diagnostics, right,  that can then be, you know,  evaluated by a healthcare professional.  and then that feedback comes back to the individual.  so in some ways it becomes invisible, right.  not only is the device mechanically invisible  in the way that it integrates in the skin.  you forget about that it's even there.  but you don't even have to worry about the data,  because that is being processed and handled and analyzed  by somebody else and there will be computer algorithms  to help with that.  >> so in the future perhaps when i you know, wake up  and i'll have my health monitor tattoo.  i log in and see a green good to go today, versus a yellow,  perhaps call your doctor, red go to the hospital.  >> yeah, you don't even have to log in.  it will send you an e-mail or something like that.  just to make it as transparent as possible to the individual.  people [inaudible] study all these data screens going on.  i think lots of people are going to want access to this data.  insurance companies, for example.  they might want to know it  because they can develop a profile  of an individual's health and set premiums,  you know, on that basis.  but there's a lot of benefit for them to you know,  encourage their customers to be wearing these things right,  because it has the effect of minimizing overall liability.  they, you know, assume if somebody gets sick.  you know, so i can imagine that ultimately from a business side  of things the insurers might be paying  for all this stuff, right.  because it would be a good investment for them to do that.  >> okay, let me just take you on a bit of a divergence  to think about, your focus is  on the healthcare applications, this technology.  but how about the other non-healthcare applications.  for example having a patch  that would detect my [inaudible] amusement park for example.  >> yeah, yep, so we work with a number of large companies  in that space exactly for that reason,  to facilitate transactions.  they want to make it as easy as possible for visitors  to the theme parks to buy stuff right.  so if patches like this provide that kind of capability,  they're interested in it.  and so we have ongoing interactions,  probably shouldn't mention the name of the company,  but we did a field trial with them.  hundreds of devices launched at a halloween event at one  of their theme parks back in october.  so most definitely there are applications in that space.  we also have funded relationships  with large cosmetics companies.  sort of the monitoring the properties of skin and using  that data to inform customers as to what kind of cosmetics  or what kind of cream or what kind  of sun screen they should be applying and when, right.  devices that monitor solution or exposure to environmental toxins  or chemicals are another example of how you could use this stuff.  >> could you, i know your time is limited, but say anything  about the broader digital, the marketplace  where you see things happening even beyond your scope  of research.  like 25 years from now.  >> yeah, i think there are a lot  of interesting things happening in display.  i mean i think you see computer systems getting more  and more sophisticated.  the interface to the human is still fairly primitive, right.  it's just a flat sort of 2d picture of a lot of things  that they're happening and they're interesting  in a 3d space beyond what's there today.  and i think sort of human machine interfaces are getting  more and more sophisticated.  so not only prosthetic control but computer game control.  just interfaces between the human and the computer,  right, the digital system.  i think there are a lot of things happening in that area.  neural control of machines is a very exciting space as well.  and i think a lot of that is going to be driven  by new software, new algorithmic approaches,  but also new hardware as well.  [ music ]  >> so what we have here is a neonatal isolet that's used  typically in hospitals.  we've used this to highlight some  of our current device technology.  inside we have our baby that typically  in a neonatal ioslet would have many wires and cables,  anywhere from three to 15 sensors depending  on the severity of the situation the baby would be in.  and we've been able to make wireless sensors  that worked off the inductive coupling technology.  and we have a sensor on the baby's foot, on the midsection  of the chest, and also on the head.  while the baby's in the isolet it's able to move freely  and is not constrained by any wires or cable.  and all the vital signs  of the baby can be monitored via the computer remotely.  during the fabrication of many devices and sensors,  some of the atmospheres that the devices are exposed  to are very critical to their operation  and fabrication process.  the glove box behind me is a controlled atmosphere glove box  that doesn't allow any air to be exposed  to the device during this process.  so some of the devices that we develop have to be fabricated  and capsulated in this type of atmosphere. 
[ music ]  >> hi. today, we're here at the beckman institute  on the north end of the university of illinois campus.  as you see this is a large and impressive facility.  >> the beckman institute was founded in 1985  by arnold beckman who donated  over 40 million dollars to the university.  it's one of the first research centers to participate  in interdisciplinary research and currently houses  over 1000 faculty members in over 40 departments.  >> cool. in addition, the institute has a number  of cutting edge labs and centers.  today, we'll be visiting the visualization laboratory  and talk with travis ross the lab manager.  are you ready?  >> let's go.  >> let's get inside, it's cold out here.  >> yeah.  [ background sounds ]  [ music ]  >> here we are in the visualization lab.  we're with travis ross the lab manager.  travis thanks for joining us today.  >> ah hum.  >> can you tell us a bit about what happens here in this lab  and the type of work that you and your colleagues engage in?  >> sure. yeah, so this is actually part the imaging  technology group which is a two group department.  we have a whole slew of visualization technologies,  so typically for this scientific environment, but it's growing  out into our design and all of the humanities who need  to in some sense do some type of advanced 3d visualization.  >> travis, i think some  of our participants may not be familiar with the term.  >> yeah.  >> visualization.  so, what does that mean in everyday?  >> right, it means a lot.  it means different things to different people always.  but on this sense, what we're talking about here  in the visualization lab is typically bringing some bit  of information whether it's, you know,  information from a scientific research project into an image  that can been seen and displayed from better communication.  and we see that manifesting itself in 3d simulations  where someone might actually take a ct scan of an object  or a microscopic component even, or a piece of you know,  some type of material, it could even be a component  that they've designed and invented right here on campus.  >> okay.  >> they need to ct scan that after they've invented it  and the maybe even test to verify their research results.  so, there's a lot of that going on.  that may be one type of visualization that's happening.  another type could actually be someone who's doing design.  they want to see more or feel more  of what they're designing before they actually get to the point  of marketing it, you know, throwing it into a product  that can actually be marketed or commercialized.  so, they will bring us a prototype  and this is one example i'm going to show here  in a minute is that you have a prototype of something  that you want to experiment with and see  if it actually is working the way you think it is.  there's almost no better way  than to either 3d scan an existing object, prototype,  physical model, sculpture, or something design from that  or take that design file and 3d print it and so when i look  at 3d printing technologies and 3d scanning,  i don't see two separate things.  a lot of times you see people talking about like,  okay 3d scanning and 3d printing and design,  they're all these segmented things.  i actually see, we use them as like this cyclical thing,  they're all useful together  and that's typically what we're dealing with.  the model for example someone designed  as a collaboration device.  >> so, this model here on the screen?  >> yep.  >> so, this is something that you're working  on currently here in the lab?  >> right. this was an actual, this is a unique example  of a group that's doing biological mechanics.  those are testing a system that can measure the mechanics  of biological components.  >> so, this is a hollow cube.  >> ah hum.  >> with some spheres placed on different parts of it.  >> right. so, what they did in this, this is actually 3d,  i've scanned this and i'm going to show how this works  in a minute, but they design the shape in probably a cad system,  printed on a 3d printer in your facility actually.  >> okay, great.  i actually saw this being printed.  >> assembled it, then a secondary process  of adding the spheres and some important,  they can calls these fiducials and they add these  to very important points that they're going  to use for measurement.  >> okay.  >> now, this is not a typical commercialized type thing,  but this is important because it's going  to display the concept that you can take a cad design,  3d print it, do something to it whatever it might be,  in this case it was they actually i think clued these two  pieces together.  >> yeah.  >> added the spheres, and then we're going to scan it back  into the computer and verify a process.  this is actually extremely common in big industries  so you see aerospace companies, automotive companies.  >> they do this.  >> design studios doing this workflow all the time.  all the time.  >> so, to make sure i understand the process of this,  you had a digital design.  >> yep.  >> on a design software package and then  that design was 3d printed to a physical object.  >> yep.  >> and physical object was brought back  to the lab to be scanned.  >> yeah.  >> so, moving from digital to physical to digital.  >> yeah.  >> then likely the scan will produce another physical  product again.  are there some other examples you'd like to show us?  you have a lot of, lot's toys here in the lab.  >> yeah. well, this is, this is a simple example of something  that i was going to show.  this was a, this was a test that i did for an open house once  and actually i have, if you guys want to see this.  >> this looks like an, like an artifact.  >> it is. it's a, it's actually a clay model.  >> okay.  >> i think i have it in my cabinet down here.  >> okay, so you have the model on this.  >> i think it's here, yeah.  >> and did you scan that with, oh great,  and so this is the actual.  >> yeah.  >> clay? it looks like you may have fired this.  >> so.  >> and then you scanned it, now how did you scan this?  what, what, which one of these tools did you use?  >> the one right behind you.  >> so, this thing here.  >> yeah, this is a, the maker of this is a steinbichler it's  as german company and they make structured light scanners.  >> okay.  >> and the technology takes a light pattern,  a verified light pattern that is actually calibrated.  >> so, this is a 3d scanner?  >> this is a scanner and it integrates with this turntable.  >> this is a turntable, so this,  this clay model would sit on the turntable.  >> yep, and.  >> and it would turn, and how does the scanner work?  is it taking pictures?  >> it's taking pictures of a line pattern and i'll show  that here in just a minute.  >> so, it's taking lots and lots of pictures.  >> yeah.  >> and so it's rendering this.  >> so, at each angle it's capturing different data.  >> different part of it.  >> and as it does that multiple times around the model,  it's filling holes, you get this and you can see it on this,  on this screen here, you actually get something  that looks like individual, you know, pieces of data.  >> okay.  >> that is full of holes, but as it scans around you will see  that you're picking up more and more data.  >> okay.  >> and it starts to fill in the gaps and you have  to do a few different scan passes  and each scanner works a little bit different way,  some of them are handheld, some of them mount to a stand  like this but this one we chose  because it's actually fairly easy to use.  >> so, travis what, so if we can scan  and manufacture broken parts what does this mean for firms  that are involved in supplying replacement parts?  what does the future hold for them?  >> yeah, well that, that's an interesting market.  there have been groups that have actually come to us to ask us,  you know, sort of interview us on how they might do this  because if you think about one of the most expensive things  for companies is inventory to store all their inventory  and if you didn't have to store inventory it means you would  need to rent a smaller facility,  so let's say your inventory is digital rather than physical  and a customer comes to you for a new part  or a replacement you can just print on demand  or the other growing side of this is putting printers  in people's garages and they can print their own parts at home.  a lot of times the technology now is handheld  so it's even battery powered devices that are handheld  and so you can freely move around an object,  whereas this is it's on the stand, it's very, you know,  there's a lot more [inaudible], it's a lot more difficult  to move, i mean that tower  by itself weighs a couple hundred pounds, so it's hard  to take that in the field, but i can put this  onto a regular camera tripod and move around easily.  we actually use this plus another one just like it  and we scan the alma mater which is 13 feet tall.  >> ah hum.  >> when it was off the platform when it was being restored,  so in a matter of three days we scanned the entire alma mater  sculpture and so that was a big undertaking with two scanners  like this one, but totally doable,  i mean people using scanners like this  to scan entire aircraft inside and out.  >> how much would this cost, this piece of equipment?  >> well, i would say industry price is somewhere  like around 100,000 dollars for the whole setup  and educational pricing is always way better,  so around 60 k for this, but you can get into the scanning market  for 20,000 now for an actual 3d scanner.  now, the other technology that i wanted to talk briefly  about which is really becoming more hipster is the what they  call 3d photo reconstruction  because you can actually do this for free.  >> so, 3d photo reconstruction, have you heard of this?  >> no, i haven't.  >> so, you've probably heard of 1, 2, 3d software right?  >> yeah.  >> by autodesk right?  >> ah hum.  >> they have free versions of scanning software and it all,  it's not, it's technically not scanning.  >> so, this is 1, 2, 3d catches, for people who don't know  about this, this is a application for your smartphone.  >> yeah.  >> and you can take out with you and you can scan objects.  >> yeah.  >> in everyday life.  >> yeah, it's really cool and then companies  like 3d systems they're catching on to this need for cheap,  not extremely accurate but easy to use scanning devices  so that they develop this device that mounts onto an ipad  and you just take your ipad walking around an object  and it will start to digitize it and this is really inexpensive.  >> we have one of those in our lab.  >> yeah, so they range is.  >> the sense scanner.  it gets you into scanning really cheaply.  >> yeah.  >> and for a lot of casual users that's going to be fine.  >> is there anything else you'd like to tell us?  >> i wish i could have shown you the dinosaur model,  i don't have that one.  maybe i can find it later.  >> we have some dinosaurs from allan craig.  >> okay, yeah.  >> and jody do you have any questions?  >> no. thank you so much for answering all my questions.  >> yeah.  >> thank you travis this is fascinating stuff.  >> yep, thanks. 
[ music ]  >> hello. in this short video, i'd like to provide a bit  of an overview of our local motors case.  hopefully by now, you've had a chance to read the article,  watch the short video,  and browse the local motors rally fighter website.  the purpose of this case is to provide a hands-on application  of the concept of customer co-creation  to an actual business setting.  let me begin by providing a bit of an overview to local motors.  okay, local motors is a new startup vehicle manufacturer.  it began in 2007, started by a fellow named jay rogers  when jay was an nba student at harvard business school.  the company is currently located in chandler, arizona,  which is a suburb of phoenix,  and is currently selling a variety of motorized vehicles,  most notably this car called "the rally fighter."  as you can see this is a rather unusual looking vehicle  that has both normal driving and off-road capabilities.  it sells for about $100,000, so it's quite expensive,  and was created using the principles  of customer co-creation.  so for example, the buyers play an active role  in actually building their own car.  at this point in time,  local motors is manufacturing the rally fighter and trying  to find more customers.  this presents to the core issue;  local motors has used co-creation  to design this vehicle, and now it needs  to successfully market it  and find a sustainable value proposition, which bring us  to three discussion questions.  first of all, what type  of customer co-creation is local motors using  to build this vehicle?  second, what do you think of the rally fighter?  do you like it?  would this new car be successful?  why or why not?  and finally, what do you think is local motors  value proposition?  i look forward to hearing your answers  to these three questions. 
[ music ]  >> hi, let's talk a bit about 3d printing.  as the executive director of the illinois maker lab i give lots  of presentations on the topic of 3d printing.  i usually like to begin my presentations with this quote  from neil gershenfeld.  he is a professor at mit, the co-founder of the fab lab,  an expert on technology in general  and the maker movement in particular.  here's what he said, "twenty years  from now we'll have star trek replicators  that can make anything."  i think this quote nicely illustrates the revolutionary  potential of 3d printing.  although professor gershenfeld's prediction is a bit hard  to believe, he's not alone.  over the past three years, jeffrey bezos, jeffrey immelt,  and barack obama have all identified 3d printing  as a revolutionary new technology.  in fact, according to several leading media sources,  including, "wired" magazine, "the economist,"  and the "new york times," "3d printing will lead us  into a new industrial revolution  and dramatically alter our economy."  thus this new emerging digital tool has [inaudible]  implications the way products are distributed  and placed into the market.  let me give you a few examples.  3d printers are currently being used by many firms  to make a wide variety of products.  thus you may already own  or actually use these 3d products without knowing it.  here are a few examples of 3d printing applications.  one domain is medical and dental.  3d printing is making rapid progress  in the medical and dental fields.  today for example in the us most hearing aids  and dental implants are 3d printed.  3d printing is also being used to create affordable prosthetics  and a number of new start ups are actually exploring 3d  printing as a way to "print" human skin and organs.  second industry that is utilizing 3d printing is the  fashion and clothing industry.  recent development in new materials have made 3d printing  of clothing a reality.  so fashion designers are finding that 3d printing enables them  to create designs that are not possible using traditional  manufacturing techniques.  so for example there are now 3d printed dresses,  shoes, and even bikinis.  in addition, large clothing manufacturers  and retailers are also starting  to realize the potential of 3d printing.  for example, nike is now 3d printing its football shoes.  [inaudible] industry is manufacturing,  actually a collection of industries.  for many years 3d printers have been used  in the manufacturing industries to do prototyping.  now we find that many printers are moving from prototyping  to actual printing of final finished products by a number  of manufacturing firms.  let me give you a few examples.  boeing, the airline company, 3d prints a variety of parts  for its airplanes including structural parts for the wings  and also airvents for the inside of the plane.  another example is the firm local motors which we talked  about in our earlier module.  they recently printed the world's first 3d printed car,  or at least the body of the car.  now that we have some examples,  let's provide a formal definition  of what 3d printing is.  this is quite simple,  "it creates objects via [inaudible] process using a  computer-driven device that reads a digital model."  actually a variety of different types of printing processes.  and also a wide variety of materials  that can be 3d printed, including plastics, metals,  ceramics, and even chocolate.  in fact just about any hard material that can be softened,  or any soft material that can be hardened, can be 3d printed.  regardless of the specific processes or type of materials,  all 3d printers start with the digital model.  this is a digital model of an object that will be printed.  thus 3d printers are a good example  of a new digital marketing tool.  now 3d printers are actually not new.  they've been around for over 30 years.  however, until recently these printers have been very large,  about the size of a refrigerator,  and very expensive-- about $100,000 or more.  however, in the last five years both the size of the printers  as well as their cost have dramatically shrunk.  today's 3d printers are the size of a microwave oven  or even smaller and can cost as little as $1,000 or even less.  thus they can now sit on your desk top.  as a result, this technology is rapidly spreading  and becoming democratized and available to consumers.  now that we've talked a bit about what 3d printing is,  what's special about it.  i'd like to give you a bit of a tour of our makerlab  and show you some of things that we make using our 3d printers.  well, we can make lots of things that are fun  such as this thor hammer [phonetic], it's a replica  that was used in the movie.  we can also make things that are practical  such as a whistle [blowing whistle]  or john-version of a whistle.  now i'd like to share some academic insights  about the topic of 3d printing.  because this is a relatively new technology,  at least for consumers, we don't have much research  on 3d printing, especially in terms  of the business implications of 3d printing.  however a few studies are starting to emerge.  i'd like to share some findings from two of these studies,  one of which i'm currently involved.  the first study is a, said that was published quite recently,  in 2013 in a journal called, "metronics."  in this research, van wittenbraut [assumed spelling]  and his colleagues at michigan tech university conducted a very  interesting experiment.  in order to determine how much money could be save,  consumer printed common household objects  at home instead of buying them at a store.  so they downloaded 20 digital designs from thingiverse.com  and printed them on a low-cost desk top 3d printer,  very similar to the printers we have here in our lab.  so for example, they printed a iphone doc, a showerhead,  and a papertowel holder.  they then compared the cost of printing these products both  in terms of material and energy, versus what it would cost them  to buy these products in a store.  what they found was quite remarkable.  the printing cost in terms of both energy  and materials was less than $20.  in comparison it would have cost them at least $300  to buy them from a store.  thus, this study indicates that it's cheaper  to make your own products than to buy them.  the second study is a printer [inaudible] project i'm  conducting here at the university of illinois  with haewon cho [assumed spelling] which is one  of our doctoral students.  in this study we're conducting a series of experiments many  of which we're doing here in the oh my makerlab  in which we compare making versus buying.  so students come here to the lab  and they make very common 3d printed objects.  we compare them against another group in the classroom  which they buy the same objects.  although the results are still quite preliminary,  this is early research, our study is finding  that there's a stark difference between these two conditions.  so for example, students who print objects  in our lab exhibit higher levels of loyalty,  they feel closer connection with these objects, and are willing  to pay almost 50% more for them.  [inaudible] identify the specific mechanism  by which this difference occurs but we believe it's mainly due  to the fact that consumers print an object,  they have a higher degree of both knowledge and involvement  about the creation process.  now let's talk about some practical recommendations  in terms of 3d printing.  first of all, i recommend that you make the physical digital.  what's really special about 3d printing is  that it blurs the dividing line  between the physical and the digital.  all 3d printed objects start with a digital model.  and once an object is digital, it can be easily stored,  transported, and modified, to meet specific customer demands.  so [inaudible] the head start on this process  by creating all new objects using digital modeling tools  such as sketchup or salar works [assumed spelling]  or by using a 3d scanner to turn the physical products  into digital designs.  these designs are especially helpful for replacement parts  which can be costly to store and difficult to transport.  for example, nasa is using 3d printers to replace parts  that break on its spacecraft while in space.  number 2, let your customers customize their designs.  so once firms begin thinking about products  as digital goods rather than physical ones,  new possibilities emerge.  this physical goods are difficult  and expensive to customize.  anyone who has ordered a tailored suit  or bought custom-made furniture knows this.  however, when digital products are customized it's relatively  cheap and easy.  indeed it's even possible  to eliminate finished products altogether.  instead of having finished products [inaudible] just offer  a basic template that let each customer design their product  to his or her own specific needs.  a great example of this is the thingiverse customizer  which allows customers to easily design a variety of products  by selecting a set of pre-determined  menu options.  thus customers are creating unique digital designs rather  than off-the-shelf products.  this digitization of physical goods makes it easier  to satisfy a broader range of customer preferences.  number 3 the middleman.  3d printers alter physical goods just  like the internet altered digital goods,  such as music, text, and video.  if you're my age, you might remember how a physical music  store was replaced by itunes.  and much the same way, the 3d printer has the potential  to disrupt the manner which physical goods are distributed.  for example, shipping firms such as dhl  and ups are very concerned about this potential disruption.  products that are shipped digitally save both time  and money and also give firms greater control  over the distribution process.  thus cutting out the middleman is enticing prospect.  a firm can do this in a variety of ways  such as posting digital files of its products,  or parts of its products on its website for direct downloading  or it can post these files on a digital 3d printing retailer  such as shapeways.com [phonetic].  fourth and finally,  dun [phonetic] is the engine of more.  let me explain.  this is one of my favorite mottos.  it comes from something called the "cult of done manifesto."  this is a document that was written  by bre pettis and kio stark.  it contains a set of ideas that talk  about how to get things done.  we have this manifesto displayed probably on the wall of our lab.  my favorite idea in this manifesto is the last one.  done is the engine of more.  this is a very simple but profound statement  that emphasizes the importance of doing rather than planning.  traditionally business schools focus more  on planning rather than doing.  so this statement made me think differently  about how to get things done.  it also captures one of the key benefits of 3d printing  because desktop 3d printing is relatively cheap and easy,  there is no need for extensive planning.  if you have an idea, you can design it  and make an initial prototype at your desktop.  once you have this physical prototype,  you can get a better idea how well it works.  you can then tweek the design, print a modified version.  if this one isn't right you can do it again and again and again.  hence, done is the engine of more.  i hope this gives you some insights into 3d printing.  i'll look forward to hearing your thoughts  about this fascinating new technology.  thank you. 
[ intro music ]  >> hi. let's take a look authenticity.  this is a very important concept in a digital world.  firms typically promote their brands by making various claims  about their features, benefits, and performance.  although most countries have laws against false advertising,  firms sometimes stretch the truth.  for example, early cigarette ads routinely make claims  about the health benefits of smoking and actually claimed  that cigarettes would protect your throat  and improve your digestion.  although the tobacco companies probably knew  that these claims were untrue, it was difficult  for most consumers to evaluate their authenticity.  however, given the amount of information available today,  on the internet, for example, and the ease  at which it can be retrieved,  these types of claims will be very hard  or impossible to make today.  in today's digital world, false claims are quickly uncovered  and often result in substantial embarrassment  and potential financial loss for the firms making such claims.  as a result, a growing number of firms are realizing  that presenting themselves and their products  in a genuine manner is simply good business practice  in a digital age.  this is the basic idea behind digital authenticity.  here are a few good examples  of authentic digital marketing initiatives.  all of these come from the food and drink category.  first of all, domino's pizza.  in 2009, a national consumer survey revealed  that domino's had the worst tasting pizza in america.  consumer postings on social media channels,  such as twitter and facebook, agreed.  many customers complained that its crust tasted like cardboard  and the sauce tasted like ketchup.  these are not good things.  the company responded to this challenge  by reformulating the way it made its pizza  and by telling its customer about this change  through a series of authentic ads distributed  through both traditional as well as online channels.  these ads showed clips of actual focus group participants  criticizing domino's pizza followed by the appearance  of domino's pizza chefs who went to the house  of these participants, asking them to try their new pizza  and then captured their reactions.  this campaign was a tremendous success and resulted  in double digit growth in product sales as well  as a sizable increase in domino's stock price.  the second example is a company called aspall.  it's a british manufacturer of apple vinegar and cider  that was founded way back in 1720,  has been a family-owned business for eight generations.  aspall leverages this long history  to tell an authentic story about its products.  this story can be clearly seen in its corporate blog,  which is called 1728cyderhouse.com.  that's cyder house with a "y."  this blog provides both stories about the brand's rich heritage  as well as updates about the family's current activities.  however, what is most interesting  about this blog is the total absence  of any explicit promotional activities.  there are no product claims, no sales messages,  or even any information about where to buy its product.  the sole purpose of this website is to tell the aspall story.  the final example is a restaurant called the heart  attack grill.  and this is an actual restaurant.  this medical-themed restaurant is located,  you may have guessed, in las vegas  and provides a controversial, but intriguing example  of authentic marketing.  this restaurant's menu is full of a variety  of unhealthy options, including its famous quadruple bypass  burger, which is about this big.  it consists of four eight-ounce beef patties,  20 slices of bacon, and eight slices of cheese,  and contains nearly 10,000 calories.  the restaurant's owner, a fellow named jon basso, says,  "our menu is purposely designed to be offensive.  it's absolutely as unhealthy as possible.  in fact, any customer who weighs over 350 pounds eats for free  and multiple customers have had heart attacks while eating  in the restaurant."  this offensive, but honest approach has been extremely  popular with his clientele, has provided this restaurant  with a tremendous amount of free publicity.  given these examples, now let's take a look at the definition  of digital authenticity.  in essence, digital authenticity refers to the degree  to which a product's online promotion provides customers  with a genuine portrayal of its origins, features, and benefits,  as well as its limitations.  authentic promotional campaigns typically focus  on telling a story rather than making a claim.  this story is usually connected to the brand in a genuine manner  and provides customer with a sense  that the brand has a purpose other than just making money.  now, let's take a bit of a deeper dive.  there are lots of interesting issues surrounding  digital authenticity.  for the purpose of this discussion, i'd like to focus  on three issues in particular.  first of all, what makes a promotion authentic?  this is a good question and one that really is hard to answer.  there is no specific recipe for creating an authentic promotion.  however, there do appear to be some key ingredients.  first of all, most authentic promotions focus more  on telling a compelling story about a product or the firm  that produces this product rather  than making a set of product claims.  for example, domino's pizza told a compelling story.  their pizza wasn't very good and they were determined to fix it.  if claims are made, these claims are typically more authentic  if they come from actual users rather than paid spokespeople.  a good example of this is proctor  and gamble's swiffer ads.  you may have seen these.  this is for their swiffer housecleaning product.  these ads include testimonials from actual people  who talk not just about the product,  but also about their lives.  finally, authentic promotions are genuine  and often have an element of uniqueness.  thus, they stand out from the pack.  for example, dove' real beauty campaign,  which is now almost a decade long,  has helped this brand stand out from its competitors  by creating a series of conversations  about what beauty is and how it affects our self-image  and engaging conversations  with actual people rather than paid models.  second, what is the role of consumers in this process?  this is another good question.  traditionally, the role of consumers  in the promotional process is simply to respond  to the promotion, with the ultimate response being the  purchase of the product that is being promoted.  in contrast, authentic promotions typically engage the  consumer in a much more active manner.  first, as discussed earlier,  most authentic promotions feature real, actual consumers.  those consumers are often the stars of the show.  a good example of this is patagonia's recent campaign  in which customers tell stories and submit photos and videos  about how they use this company's product.  in addition to starring in these ads,  customers sometimes even create them.  for example, many firms, such as pepsi, miller beer,  and l'oreal have held crowd sourcing contests  to ask consumers to create the ads for their products.  thus, consumers can play an active role as content creators.  finally, consumers often help distribute authentic ads  through social media outlets, such as twitter,  facebook, and youtube.  third, what are the benefits of being authentic?  well, engaging authentic promotion appears to have lots  of benefits for firms.  first of all, authentic promotions are less likely  to be victimized by a harmful doppelganger brand image.  as noted earlier, these dbis are usually directed against brands  that are portrayed as being something that they're not.  thus, if a brand is authentically portrayed  for what it is, a doppelganger brand image seems less likely.  in addition, authentic brands are more likely  to receive positive word-of-mouth and be broadcasted  through social media channels.  for example, dove's real beauty campaign  that we just discussed has been largely communicated  by digital word-of-mouth  and through relatively a small amount of typical,  traditional advertising spending.  finally, there is growing evidence  that consumers consider authenticity  when making a purchase decision.  according to one recent survey, over 60% of consumers  around the world say they would choose an authentic brand  over its competitors.  therefore in some, authentic promotions appear  to provide substantial benefits to firms. 
[ music ]  >> let's discuss our first digital marketing concept,  customer co-creation.  i'd like to begin using a quote from one of my favorite books  about customer co-creation.  this book is called "innovation happens elsewhere."  it's by ron goldman and richard gabriel.  these gentlemen are two former executives  from the computer company sun microsystems,  which is well known for employing customer co-creation  in the software development process.  and in this book, they have a really simple,  but i think profound quote, and their quote is,  "innovation happens everywhere,  but there is simply more elsewhere than here."  now if you think about it that's true for just about anything-  happiness, sadness, eating, sleeping;  that there's more activity happening elsewhere than here.  so for example, the university of illinois has lots  of smart professors and students,  but most of the smart professors and students  in the world are not here in champagne.  and sun microsystems realized this concept and employed this  to benefit its innovation process.  essentially the idea that there are more resources  for innovation outside the firm than inside the firm,  so they've leveraged these fields and resources;  we're still their contributors,  to enhance their innovation processes.  and this is really the core idea of customer co-creation.  the realization that your customers can actually help  enhance your new-product development activities.  but us customers are not only buying your products they may  also help design and develop them.  this is a radical departure  from the more traditional internally focused innovation  processes that most firms had used in the past.  let's provide a few more examples  of customer co-creation.  another example form the open-source software domain  is apache.  and i may not have heard of apache before,  but apache is the world's foremost  and most widely used server software.  indeed over half of all websites are run using apache software.  and the development and maintenance  of this software is almost entirely done via  customer co-creation.  a second example, a bit more consumer-focused,  is the video game called "little big planet" it's offered  by sony.  it's now in its third edition, and this game  if you haven't played it before has a built in tool kit;  a design platform that allows players  to create their own levels, and is very similar  to the design platform used by professional game developers.  currently, this game has over 8 million levels, and nearly all  of them were created by its customers.  a third example comes from the clothing domain,  the t-shirt manufacturer "threadless" located in chicago  in the u.s. it was voted as one  of the most innovative companies in america.  this innovative clothing firm has no in-house design team.  instead, it gets all its designs from its customers.  we'll discuss threadless in more depth during our case study  of this company.  now, now that you have these examples let's provide a bit  more of a formal definition of what customer co-creation is.  we look at customer co-creation as contributions made  by customers that assist a firm in the design and development  of its new-product offerings.  here we use the term customers quite broadly,  so these contributions may also come from non customers,  but this is a bit less likely.  typically, these contributions are made using a web-based  platform, thus they're a good example  of a digital marketing tool. 
[ music ]  >> hi. let's talk about second digital product concept,  the doppelganger brand image.  first of all, what's a doppelganger?  it's kind of an unusual word.  it's a german word so you german speakers can correct my  pronunciation which i'm sure is incorrect.  my understanding is the word doppelganger is actually a  combination of two words.  doppel which in german means double.  and ganger which means someone who is walking.  so in essence a doppelganger is a double walker or,  as we say in america, an alter ego.  and this concept was derived in germany in the 1500s  with the idea that there was this myth that all  of us had a doppelganger or an alter ego.  and that if you or your friends saw the doppelganger  that bad things would happen.  so that's what we're talking  about here is an alternative image, in this case of a brand,  which is negative in fashion.  so that's the basic idea.  it's a long term so i think i'll just use the abbreviation dbi  for most of this talk.  so here's the basic idea.  developing an appealing  and distinctive brand image is an important part  of any firm's product strategy.  this strong brand image, which leads to brand equity,  helps differentiate one firm's product offerings  from those of its competitors.  however since very few products have really large tangible  differences in terms of product features,  most branding efforts focus on intangible features and try  to give their brands an emotional appeal.  now while these appeals are attractive to some customers,  many just ignore them, and a few may actually dislike them.  in the past if you disliked a brand image you'd probably try  to avoid the brand or you might share your dislike  with your friends and your family  over a dinner conversation.  however today with the democratization  of new digital tools such as the internet and blogs,  you can do a lot more.  for example, you could use digital design software.  digital cameras that you can buy very inexpensively,  and digital editing programs, which often are free,  combined with the internet allow you to actually remix  or create your own version of a brand that you find offensive.  this is the basic idea behind a doppelganger brand image  or a dbi.  and it happens all around us.  let me give you a few examples.  take, for example, the new pepsi logo.  if you recall, pepsi introduced this new logo  about five years about in 2009.  they paid a famous design firm a million dollars  to create this new logo which, as you can see,  is pretty much just a modification of its old logo.  this new logo was heavily criticized  by several internet blogs as being a waste of money.  even more than that, several graphic artists actually created  a doppelganger version of this logo, as you can see,  to represent an obese man, as a means of protesting  against pepsi's effect on our health.  this doppelganger image, this campaign,  quickly became an internet meme and increased attention  on the negative effects of drinking pepsi.  a second example comes from the automotive industry.  and this is a campaign that's known as fuh2.  this creative viral internet campaign began in 2008  in response to general motors' marketing of the hummer suv,  specifically the hummer h2 in the mid 2000s.  now general motors tried to position this brand  as the ultimate four wheel drive vehicle capable of taking  on any challenge, and used the slogan, "like nothing else."  the fuh2 campaign crafted a very effective doppelganger image  focused not just on the brand itself, but also its owners  which are portrayed as jerks who care little  about the environment by driving this huge gas guzzler.  a final example comes from the cigarette industry.  this is the joe chemo campaign  which was an internet campaign created  by an organization called adbusters.  and this organization has a lot of doppelganger images  for different brands that it finds offensive.  this particular campaign was  against the camel cigarette brand and a character known  as joe camel which was very popular in the 1990s  in the u.s. and also globally.  in this doppelganger image the confident,  cool and popular joe camel is replaced by this sick,  depressed and lonely joe chemo.  shortly after this doppelganger campaign began,  joe camel was withdrawn from the market.  so those are a few examples.  let's talk about the definition or what we're talking  about in terms of a dbi.  a doppelganger brand image is a collection of disparaging images  and stories about a brand which are circulated  in popular culture by a fairly loosely organized network  of anti-brand activists, bloggers and opinion leaders.  these images are usually focused on well known brands  that are viewed as lacking authenticity,  and trying to create a false or misleading emotional appeal  through their promotional activities.  so now let's take a bit of a deeper dive in to this concept.  there's lots of interesting issues surrounding a dbi.  for the purpose of this discussion i'd like to focus  on three issues in particular.  first of all, what would motivate somebody to create one  of these doppelganger images?  clearly creating a dbi such as the joe chemo campaign takes  lots of time and substantial energy.  so why would somebody go through all the trouble of doing this?  well, typically these efforts are motivated by a perception  that a brand is being inauthentic by claiming  to be something that it's not.  by disguising its true nature.  this indeed was the motive for the joe chemo campaign  which was the result of anger and frustration  that joe camel tried to portray smoking as fun  and cool while ignoring its potential risks and dangers.  a second interesting discussion is what types  of brands are most susceptible to a dbi.  typically most doppelganger images are focused  against large, well known brands.  these brands have a high degree of familiarity which means  that their business practices are more likely to come  to the attention of anti-brand activists.  in addition, dbi campaigns focused  against larger brands are more likely to get attention  than those focused against smaller brands  so that the individuals who create these campaigns will get,  you know, more play for what they do.  thus, for example, walmart has several anti-branding  doppelganger initiatives aimed against it, while target,  the second leading retailer in the u.s., has far fewer.  for example, the "people of walmart" viral video has  over 10 million views while the "people  of target" video has only about 5,000.  that's quite a difference.  a third interesting aspect of a dbi is  where are these images found.  now many dbis are created as a form of individual protest  and thus are located on an individual's blog  or twitter feed or facebook page.  sometimes, once in a while,  these individual accounts are picked  up by a larger online media outlet such as reddit, dig,  buzz feed, or even traditional news channels.  for example, the pepsi dbi that we talked  about earlier was initially posted on its creator's blog.  and this blog has very few followers even today,  but it was then popularized on buzz feed in a feature  that they ran called "logos that look like other things."  this buzz feed posting received over 300,000 views.  dbis can also be found in other places such as websites  of anti-brand activists like adbusters.  we can find dbis for a collection of brands,  including mcdonalds, starbucks,  and calvin klein, just to name a few.  finally you can find dbis also  in some specialized initiatives targeted  against specific brands.  for example, walmart has over a dozen websites dedicated  against this retailer.  for example, we have hell-mart.com  and walmartsucks.org.  let's just point out that i don't endorse these sites  and personally i love shopping at walmart. 
[ intro music ]  >> hi. let's talk about the new retail landscape.  in today's digital world,  just about any product can be purchased  from an online retailer.  for example, amazon.com sells  over 250 million different products  on its us website alone.  thus, addition to books, amazon sells an astonishing variety  of different products.  some of these products will be quite hard to find  at your local physical retailer.  for example, if you were a university  of illinois fan living in salvador, brazil,  it'd be quite difficult to find this university of illinois hat  at your local retailer.  however, you could easily buy this hat from amazon.com along  with about 80, 8,000 other illinois items,  including sunglasses, scarves, and even toolboxes.  in addition to large online mass marketers, such as amazon,  there are also many highly successful online retailers  that specialize in specific product categories,  such as eyeglasses, shoes, and even wedding dresses.  for example, we recently remodeled our home  and purchased our staircase from an online vendor.  thus, online retailing is a considerable threat  to traditional physical retailers.  indeed, online competition has forced the closure  of several retailers across many product categories,  including music, books, and consumer electronics.  in the us, many indoor shopping malls are closing  or have several vacant stores  and no new indoor malls have been built in nearly a decade.  despite the rise of online retailing,  most people still buy most of their products  from a physical retailer.  indeed, in the us and many other countries, less than ten percent  of total retail sales are done online.  moreover, several physical stores are starting  to use digital tools to enhance the shopping experience.  in this video lecture,  we'll focus on how physical retailers are adapting  in response to this new digital world  to form a new retail landscape.  let me give you a couple of examples.  first of all, the best buy vending machine.  perhaps you've seen this.  like many big box retailers,  best buy has had difficulty combatting online retailers.  in contrast to online retailers such as amazon.com,  best buy has a much higher set of fixed cost, such as the lease  for its retail stores, high energy, and the salary  of its ever-changing sales staff.  thus, big box stores are shrinking in size in an attempt  to bring these costs down.  best buy has taken this size reduction to the extreme  by installing vending machines stocked  with top-selling products, such as smartphones, cameras,  and headphones, across many high traffic locations,  such as hotels, airports, and train stations.  at present, best buy has about 200  of these machines installed across the us.  a second example of this changing landscape is the tesco  virtual stores.  tesco is the uk walmart.  so this british mega-retailer has installed a set  of virtual stores at bus stops and subway stations  in seoul, south korea.  in essence, these stores are simply a large screen  that displays various products.  shoppers just need to download a tesco app on the smartphone.  they can use this app to scan the barcode  of the item they want to purchase  on these virtual screens.  the items that they scan can then be delivered to their home.  this tesco app is now the number one shopping app in all of korea  and has well over a million downloads.  the third example comes from australia,  and it's called the rotate store, and that's what it was.  this interesting pop-up store operated in sydney from 2013  to 2014, and this temporary store transformed its entire  assortment every eight weeks.  so every two months, it was a completely different store.  this innovative approach encouraged customers to return  to the store to see what was new.  in addition to the new merchandise that was stocked  in the store, it was also hard to find online.  now that we have some examples, let's look at a definition  of what we mean by new retail.  so this concept is closely linked to the ideas outlined  in darrell rigby's article on the future of shopping,  which i encourage you to read as part of this module.  in essence, new retail is a collection of strategies,  both physical and digital, that physical retailers are using  to react to the challenges of operating in a digital world.  so what does this mean?  let me take a deeper dive into some interesting issues.  there are lots of issues we could discuss.  i want to focus on three key observations  about this new retailing landscape.  first of all, location, location, location.  according to many real estate experts,  location is the single most important factor  when selling a home.  thus, it's better to have a bad house in a good neighborhood  than a good house in a bad neighborhood.  the importance of location also extends to retailing.  a substantial body of research shows  that online retailing is heavily influence by location,  which may sound surprising.  for example, people who have easy access  to well-priced physical stores are less likely to shop online.  thus, online shopping is more likely among consumers living  in small towns here in champaign, for example,  than in big cities like chicago.  thus, the appeal of the digital is strongly influenced  by one's physical environment.  second, purchase versus information.  in addition to providing a means of purchase,  digital retailing also provides a considerable amount  of product information.  for example, amazon.com provides a product description,  extensive technical information, and also user reviews for most  of the products that it sells.  thus, consumers who visit digital retailers not only  purchase products, but also obtain information about them.  they can also do the same for physical retailers, of course.  in recent years, there has been lots of discussion  about the showrooming phenomenon  in which customers first visit a physical store  and then buy a product online.  perhaps you have done this yourself.  i have. indeed, in the us, about two out of every three customers  who buy online go to a physical store first  and take a look at the product.  although showrooming clearly does happen, in reality,  more people engage in its opposite,  which is called webrooming,  in which they first obtain information  about a product online, but then buy their product  in a physical store.  third, digital and physical.  we tend to think of digital and physical  as two entirely separate things.  indeed, these two forms  of retail are quite different in many ways.  however, as shown by the tesco example we just discussed,  a growing number of retailers are seeking ways  to blend these two together.  this blending of the digital and the physical is often referred  to as omnichannel marketing and is based on the idea  that retailers need to take advantage of the strengths  of each of these two different shopping channels.  for example, physical retailing is more effective  for returning products, obtaining customer service,  while online retailing is better in terms  of conducting product research and getting the best price.  thus, a growing number of retailers are seeking  to have a presence in both of these two channels. 
[ music ]  >> hi. let's discuss pay what you want which is a new  and very interesting pricing strategy that's really suited  for our new digital age.  i'd like to begin with a quote from my favorite book  on pricing, "the strategy and tactics of pricing,"  by thomas nagle and reed holden.  this is the best book on pricing today.  thomas says, "pricing is the moment of truth.  all of marketing comes in to focus in the pricing decision."  as illustrated by this quote,  picking the right price is extremely important,  a very important part of a firm's marketing strategy.  if the price is too high, firms will lose potential sales.  if it's too low, it will lose potential revenue.  thus the key is to find the price that's just right.  the problem is that what is just right  for you may be too high or too low for me.  thus by allowing price to vary according to the value  that a product provides  to various potential customers makes a lot of sense.  firms try to do this in a number of ways.  for example, in the u.s.  and other countries movie theaters offer discounts  for demographic groups that typically have lower incomes  such as students and senior citizens.  this approach is called price segmentation  and it's a commonly used pricing strategy.  the setting of these different price segments has been  traditionally determined by firms rather than customers.  for example, my local grocery store offers discounts on donuts  that are two days old.  i can't walk in to the store and say that i want  to pay this discounted price for new freshly baked donuts.  however in recent years a few firms have experimented  with the idea of allowing the customers to segment themselves  by letting them name their own price.  this rather unorthodox strategy is quickly getting popularity  and is being called pay what you want or pwyw for short.  although this pricing strategy has been employed  in some physical stores, it is ideally suited  to the digital marketing environment  because of the increased ability of firms  to control the distribution of their product  and to track customer payment activity on a digital platform.  in addition, since the marginal cost of a digital good is close  to zero, this strategy is worth relatively low risk  in a digital marketing environment.  let's take a look at some examples  of this intriguing pricing strategy.  first example is a fellow named louis c.k. this is a famous  american comedian who recently sold his comedy  to a website called humble bundle using a pay what you  want strategy.  this website specializes in offering digital products  such as music, books, and videos using a pay what you  want approach.  it also donates some of these proceeds to charity.  the second example is a website called headsets.com.  in recent years this online headset retailer has  experimented with a pay what you want strategy as a means  of rewarding customer loyalty.  nearly all of its customers actually paid the suggested  price or close to it, which is interesting.  according to its ceo mike faith, this strategy has resulted  in a 30% increase in its return on investment.  the third example is from radiohead.  in 2007 the british rock band radiohead offered its new album  "in rainbows" for sale using a pay what you want strategy.  this approach received worldwide attention  and was a launching pad for the pay what you want movement.  we'll discuss this example  in more detail during our case study for this module.  now that you have these examples, let's take a look  at the definition of pay what you want.  this strategy lets consumers decide how much they want to pay  for a particular product.  although a firm may suggest a price, its customers are free  to pay less or even more than this price.  indeed several pay what you want offerings let customers pay  even nothing. 
[ intro music ]  >> hi. let's talk about price comparison tools.  for many customers, price is an important consideration  when making a purchase.  it is one of the most visible characteristics of a product  and is especially important for expensive products,  such as appliances, furniture, and automobiles,  in which prices can vary substantially  from one retailer to another.  as we discussed earlier, before the rise of digital tools,  the price of a product was often not known  until the consumer was actually at the retail location  and saw the price on the shelf.  the internet changed all of this  by making prices much more visible  and by allowing customers to see the price  of a product before entering a store.  today, customers have even more power, as there are now a number  of price comparison tools that allow customers the ease  to compare prices across a number of retailers,  both physical and also online.  many of these tools are also available on a mobile platform.  so customers cannot online compare prices before going  to a store, they can also compare prices while shopping  at a store.  here are some examples of some popular price comparison tools.  first of all, google shopping.  this is the world's largest  and most comprehensive price comparison tool.  users just type in the name of a product and a list  of competing retailers appears.  although the focus is on the prices offered  by various online retailers,  there is usually some price information  about a few local, physical retailers.  in addition to prices,  this website also provides user reviews  of these various retailers as well as reviews  of the product itself.  this tool is available in about 25 different countries,  including the us, india, russia, and brazil.  second, the second example is a price search tool  called pricebaba.  this price tool is based in india and focuses  on helping customers find the lowest price for mobile phones  in various indian cities.  in addition to focusing on a single product category,  this tool also focuses on making price comparisons  for physical stores because only a small percentage  of indian consumers actually shop online.  the third example is called red laser.  this price comparison tool is designed specifically  for mobile devices and is available for a free download  on all of the major smartphone platforms.  this portable tool allows in-store shoppers  to obtain comparison prices for a wide variety of products  by simply scanning the barcode using the app's  built-in scanner.  within a few seconds, prices of competing retailers, both online  and also physical, appear on your phone's screen.  we'll discuss red laser in more detail as parts  of our hands-on exercise for this module.  now that we have some examples,  let's define what this concept really is.  a price comparison tool is essentially a digital platform  that provides shoppers with the ability to easily compare prices  across a set of retailers that can be both online as well  as physical retailers.  some price comparison tools focus  on a single product category while others cover a much wider  range of products.  these tools are typically free to use  and are increasingly becoming more common  on mobile devices, such as smartphones.  now that we have the definition, let's take a bit  of a deeper dive into some interesting questions.  there are lots of questions we could ask  about price comparison tools.  i want to focus on three basic questions.  first of all, what features do these tools typically offer?  well, nearly all price comparison tools offer  information about comparative prices across a number  of retailers, again, both physical and online.  in addition, many provide information  about shipping costs, retailer and their product reviews,  and also provide a set of product photos  so you can see what the product looks like.  thus, these tools contain a substantial amount  of useful information.  second, how do they work?  nearly all price comparison tools are free to use.  they usually earn money through advertising.  in addition, many of these tools, such as google shopping,  vendors pay a fee to have their products listed.  most of these tools are quite easy to use.  you just simply type in the name of a product  or scan a product using its barcode.  the price data for these sites can come from a variety  of different sources, including information supplied  by retailers, a scanning of a retailer's web page,  or through crowd sourcing  in which users submit price information to the website.  our third question, do these tools really save  customers money?  that's a good question.  well, the limited research  that has been done thus far suggest that, on average,  customers who use these tools pay somewhat lower prices  than those who don't.  however, research has also found that none  of these tools are perfect.  all of them contain a fairly large number of errors,  such as incorrectly listed prices.  also, the price that is featured  on these tools may not actually be the lowest price.  so the customers should exercise caution when using them. 
>> hi, let's take a look at user generated content  or ugc for short.  historically, most firms have carefully managed the promotion  of their products.  one of the reasons why promotion has been carefully managed is  because this activity is quite expensive.  for example, in the u.s., a 30 second commercial  on a national television channel usually costs  at $100,000 just to have it broadcast.  since most commercials are shown multiple times,  this cost quickly multiplies into millions of dollars  and this doesn't even include the cost  of developing the commercial in the first place.  well, the rise of new digital tools has dramatically changed  this equation, low cost digital cameras,  free digital editing software  and online broadcasting platforms such as youtube,  facebook and twitter have made the creation and dissemination  of promotional messages much cheaper  and far easier than ever before.  as a result, a growing number of firms are taking advantage  of these development to reduce their promotional cost.  for example, the u.s. beer company --  excuse me, u.s. beer brand, old milwaukee,  has dramatically reduced its promotional cost  by airing its ads on youtube instead of on television.  in addition to reducing the promotional cost for firms,  these tools have also enabled customers  to take a more active role in the development  and dissemination of promotional material.  for example, there are now about 300 million twitter accounts  which produce in total about 500 million tweets a day.  it is estimated that about 20%  of these tweets are somehow brand related,  thus every day there are  about 100 million free promotional messages just  on twitter alone.  today, anyone with an internet connection, a computer  and an idea can create  and disseminate a promotional message  for just about any product.  so in essence, digital tools have democratized the  promotional landscape.  this is the basic idea behind ugc.  here are a few examples of user generated content.  all of these examples are cases  in which firms are encouraging ugc in an active manner;  however, ugc often occurs without firm's encouragement  or approval, such as when travelers post reviews  about restaurants at hotels on websites  such as travelocity.com, perhaps you've done this yourself.  our first example is a company called go pro;  this california company develops  and sells high definition video cameras.  these cameras are quite compact, they're very durable  and relatively cheap and are often used  by extreme sports enthusiasts, such as mountain bikers,  wind surfers and skydivers.  they use these cameras to capture their adventures  so go pro strategically uses ugc by holding contests  in which they ask their customers to submit photos  or videos of their adventures  that they have taken with their cameras.  these submissions provide a steady stream of content  to go pro's various social media sites  and also provides a very persuasive form of promotion  by showing potential customers how go pro can be used  and its value of owning this product.  the second example is a company called warby parker;  warby parker is a manufacturer and retailer of eye glasses  that has a few physical retail locations but does the majority  of its business online.  this company offers a service called home try on;  in this service, it mails its customers five different pairs  of eye glasses.  these customers can try them on for five days  and then send the ones that they don't want back to the company.  warby parker actively encourages these customers to take photos  of themselves and share these photos  on social media using the hash tag warby home try on.  in fact, many of the customers do take  and share these photos online as a way  of gaining helpful feedback from others.  in addition to helping their customers,  these shared photos also provide warby parker  with increased exposure and a free source  of promotional material.  the third example is t-mobile,  the mobile phone market is a very competitive industry  and has intense competition among carriers  such as t-mobile, at&t and verizon.  t-mobile has effectively used ugc to help fight these battles.  for example, february 2014,  it conducted a twitter campaign called breakup letter;  this campaign encouraged users of competing carriers to switch  to t-mobile by sending their old carrier a breakup letter  and then posting this letter on social media.  this campaign was very successful  with over 80,000 new customers submitting breakup letters.  in addition to generating many new customers,  this campaign also resulted  in substantial embarrassment for its competition.  now that we've had these examples, let's take a look  at defining what ugc really is.  well, user generated content occurs  when a product's customers create  and disseminate online ideas about the product  of the firm that markets it.  these ideas often come in the form of text but can also come  in other forms, such as music, photos or videos.  ugc has three defining characteristics; first,  the contribution is by the users of a product rather  than the firm that sells the product.  second, these contributions are somewhat creative in nature  and the user adds something new to what's been done before.  and third, these contributions are posted online  and are generally accessible to others, thus an email  that transmits a link to a youtube video created  by somebody else wouldn't be considered ugc.  typically, ugc is not a commercial in nature  and doesn't make any direct promotional appeals,  thus it's a very interact  and very subtle form of product promotion.  now that we have this definition,  let's take a deeper dive into this interesting issue  and the concern surrounding it.  for purposes of this discussion, i want to focus  on three key issues; number one,  what are the different types of ugc?  although most ugc appears on social media platforms  such as facebook, twitter and youtube, it can also appear  in other online platforms, such as blogs, discussion forums  or even a firm's website.  some of the most common types of ugc include blog postings,  product reviews and various types of submissions  to firm based invitations, such as the t-mobile example  that we discussed earlier.  of all of these different types of ugc, product reviews appear  to have the most important impact in terms  of convincing customers to buy a product.  number two, what motivates users to contribute?  well, the factors that motivate customers to engage  in ugc are very similar to the motives that encourage them  to engage in co-creation which we discussed earlier.  the biggest motive by far is simple social recognition.  being an active contributor on a social media platform  such as facebook or twitter can help provide a certain amount  of fame and prestige.  in addition, customers can also gain social recognition  when a firm profiles their contributions on its web page  or in its advertisements.  for example, the yogurt company chobani,  has placed its customer tweets  on physical billboard signs across u.s. highways.  in addition to social recognition,  some users are motivated by financial incentives.  typically there are few financial rewards for ugc;  however, a few firms are trying to encourage ugc  by holding contests that provide winners with cash, gift cards  or some other type of tangible reward.  for example, dunkin donuts encourages ugc  by holding contests in which customers submit photos  of themselves consuming its products and it rewards winners  with a variety of prizes such as smart phones and televisions.  third, what are the benefits of ugc?  well, user contributions provide firms  with lots and lots of benefits.  first of all, this type of promotion is typically low cost  since the content is provided freely by a firm's customers.  in addition to this cost savings,  ugc also has a positive impact on product sales.  in fact, research suggests that most customers trust ugc more  than they trust traditional promotions  such as paid advertising.  ugc also helps meet a firm's need to keep its content fresh  and makes their website much more interesting, thus websites  that feature ugc benefit from both higher traffic,  as well as longer page views. 
[ music ]  >> hi. i'm going to walk you through the  "my starbucks idea exercise."  the purpose of this exercise is to get some hands-on experience  in customer co-creation  and understand how firms utilize co-creation platforms  to enhance their innovation capacity.  as a bit of background the" my starbucks idea initiative" began  in 2008 as a means of engaging with their brand community  to solicit ideas to enhance their operations  and their product offerings.  so far, this platform has received over 200,000 ideas,  and starbucks has actually implemented many  of these ideas into their stores.  so let me go ahead and take you through this website  and show you what i'm looking for in the exercise.  so first of all i'm here at goggle,  but you can use whatever web browser that you like,  and simply type in my starbucks idea,  and here it is; it pops up on top.  and here you see the platform.  at the top you see three different menu options,  the first-- "got an idea" is the platform entry  for which you enter your idea.  for this, you'll actually need to sign up  and create an account; we'll talk about that  in just a few moments.  the second category is a place where you can view ideas  that have submitted already by people such as you.  and the third column is ideas in action,  and this is will actually show you the ideas  that starbucks have actually taken and are utilizing  to enhance their operations.  you see here on the left categories of ideas,  and they're broke into three main categories-  "product ideas," ideas for coffee  and teas, foods and so forth.  second of all "experience ideas," these are ideas of how  to enhance the experience of being in a starbucks store.  and the third category is something they call  "involvement ideas," which are ideas for engaging  with the starbucks community giving back  to social causes, for example.  so to give you an idea of how to begin, as a first step,  there's this search box in which you can enter your idea  and see what others have said along these lines.  so i have a strong liking for oatmeal, and oatmeal products  such as cookies and cereals, so i'm going to type  in the term oatmeal cereal  to see what others have said about it.  i just hit the green box, and you'll see here there's a total  of 47 different ideas related to oatmeal,  and i'm just going through--  scrolling down to make sure  that no one has submitted the same idea that i have.  okay, it looks like there's some ideas here  of some cereal products already.  okay, some different options for cereals.  so it appears that some others have entered similar ideas,  but perhaps not quite the same thing,  so as a next step what i'm going  to do is actually sign in, hit the sign in box.  and i've already created an account, so i'll just put  in my user id and password.  if you don't have an account on "my starbucks idea,"  you simply need to go to the right here,  and click on "create a starbucks dot com account,"  and this is much like any other web-based platform,  they just need your user id and a password; it's pretty simple.  and as you can see now it's signed in it says, "hi there,"  and that's my user id eric10208.  so to enter my idea i simply go back to the top  and hit "got an idea,"  and you'll see there are three boxes that appear.  the first is a pull-down menu  in which you enter the category of your idea.  since mine is about cereal,  i'm going to click the food category.  the next box is the idea box in which you put a brief summary  of what your idea is, so i'll type oatmeal cereal,  and then as soon as i hit that this pop up box appears,  and this box shows you related ideas.  so you'll take a look at this to make sure  that no one is offering the same exact idea,  otherwise you may want to do something else.  so i see oatmeal cookie, oatmeal cup.  let's see starbucks own brand of cold cereal,  but nothing quite the same as my idea, so i'm going to exit  out of the box, and type  in a quick description of what my idea is.  so i'll put down, "i am a big fan of oatmeal.  it tastes good and is good for you, thus i believe  that starbucks should offer an oatmeal cereal in its stores."  so that's my description.  i simply hit the small green box on the bottom  to post my idea to the forum.  and there it is, and so if you notice here is the posting;  it has the posting date and time.  it has my user id, the description that i just entered.  and if you notice on the left, there's two thumbs,  a thumbs up and a thumbs down.  what this is for is for other members  of the community once they're logged in can either vote  in favor thumbs up, or against thumbs down your idea.  so each thumbs up is worth ten points.  each thumbs down is negative ten points.  and so what you need to do is after you enter idea come back  after a period of time, i suggest 24 hours,  to see how many points are assigned to your idea,  and also you'll notice that there's a comment section here,  and you'll see comments perhaps in which the individuals  who vote on your idea may enter some helpful suggestions  or their thoughts.  and likewise, you can enter comments  to any idea here at the menu box.  the next step is to complete the assignment.  for this assignment, we're looking  for four things in particular.  first of all, please record your idea, the amounts of points  that it received positive or negative, and also a summary  of the reactions in terms of the comments  that other users provided about your idea.  second of all, we like your thoughts  about how this experience made you feel,  so how it made you feel about starbucks, the company.  third, this exercise again is an exercise  in customer co-creation.  if you recall we talked about four types  of customer co-creation- collaborating, submitting,  tinkering, and designing.  so please record what type  of co-creation you think this platform is.  and finally, we'd like your thoughts  about what you think starbucks is trying to accomplish  through this platform.  that's it.  i look forward to hearing your ideas. 
[ music ]  >> hi. today we're on the north side of champaign.  it's part of a large retailer  that our students often go to do their shopping.  and we're here today to work  on our exercise on price search apps.  in particular we'll be working on actual assessment of an app  that came out on your smart phones called redlaser.  >> yeah. so redlaser's actually one  of the most popular price search apps out there.  it works for a lot of different phone platforms like iphone,  windows phones, and android, and it actually has  over 27 million users.  redlaser just does more than price searching,  but we really are just going to be focusing  on the price search portion of the app today.  >> and the purpose is to get some hands  on experience using these apps and to see to what you said.  they could actually help save consumers money  on the things they buy.  you ready?  >> yeah.  >> let's go give it a try.  first on my list is coffee.  we need to find some coffee.  maxwell house.  this is my grandmother's favorite coffee.  let's see here.  let's take out my -- put this down.  open up redlaser.  scan the barcode.  does it matter which way you put it?  upside down is fine?  okay. store price is $3.86.  lowest online price is $3.45.  and lowest local price is $3.98.  let's write those down.  maxwell house.  $3.98. and $3.45.  got it.  >> all right.  so we're moving on to televisions now,  and i think we'll go with the visio here.  we'll scan the price tag right here.  so according to redlaser the best online price is $399  and it's the same at the store here,  but the best local price is actually $349.  so that's pretty much a $50 discount.  we'll write that down.  >> okay. looking for some t-shirts.  t-shirts. t-shirts.  oh, yes. t-shirts.  think i'll try these jockey brands t-shirts.  size medium.  not quite my size, but give it a try.  quick scan.  got it. let's see.  what do we have here for results?  these t-shirts, three in a pack, jockey,  cost $12 here in this store.  see the cheapest online is actually more expensive, $18.99.  there's also the same local retail price.  great.  >> all right.  so we're looking for detergent.  i think we're going to go with this gain here.  all right.  so let's find the barcode first.  there it is.  and we'll do a quick scan.  awesome. so according  to redlaser the best online price is $16.98  and then the local price here at the store is $14.99.  and the best local price is $14.97.  so this seems to be a relatively good deal.  write this down really quick.  and we're good.  >> okay. let's see about these batteries.  duracell. the store price is $7.99.  let's give it a scan.  the cheapest -- get this back out of the way.  so duracell batteries, the store price is $7.99.  and the cheapest local price is actually a bit more expensive,  $10.99.  and the lowest online price is in between, $8.97.  that's it.  we've finished our shopping trip.  hi. now that you're back from your redlaser shopping trip,  let's talk about how to complete the assignment.  there are three questions in particular.  first of all, please calculate the total amount  of money you would have saved using this price search app both  in terms of internet retailers, but also local retailers.  also think about the different categories  and where the price savings were.  were they across all five categories or just a couple?  second, i'd like your thoughts  about how you felt using this app.  were you comfortable using it?  was it difficult?  was it easy?  is this something that you would use in the future?  why or why not?  and finally how can this app be improved?  how could you make this better?  now i'm going to ask julie [assumed spelling]  to join me back here on campus and we're going to talk  about our results and to see  to what degree they matched your results.  we're back here on campus.  taking a look at our results, trying to figure  out how much money we would have saved had we bought these five  products using the redlaser app.  so julie you have your results there.  what did you find?  would you have saved any money?  >> yeah. actually i found  that the local prices were the cheapest prices.  they offer the most discounts based on what the app said.  that was a little more surprising to me just  because i thought that internet prices would provide the  most discount.  >> okay. so as a reminder,  this app gives us both not only internet prices,  but also the price of local retailers.  and i actually found something quite similar.  i found that the local prices were cheaper  than the store prices, but i did find something a bit different.  that i would have saved a bit more money, about $12 more,  had we bought these products online.  however most of this savings was for the big ticket item,  the television, which accounted for the majority of the savings.  so based on this experience, and this was both  of our first time using a price search app, what did you think?  is this something that you'd want to use in the future,  on future shopping trips?  >> absolutely, yeah, just because of the discount offered.  i think that it would definitely be useful.  i did struggle a little.  there were some items that i tried scanning  that didn't really register on the app.  it either couldn't find the upc code  or it wouldn't really show the prices  of other local stores or online mediums.  >> i found the same thing.  we had, for example, trouble with the watches.  >> yeah.  >> surprisingly.  we couldn't get any price matching for watches.  i shared a similar reaction.  i found it to be fairly easy to use.  it was very quick.  the scanning process is super quick.  and on top of this, one thing we didn't mention previously,  is that the retailer that we visited,  and many large retailers in the u.s.,  have a price matching strategy.  that means if we show them the price from the redlaser app,  if it's from a large retailer such as amazon.com, this store  and others will actually match that app.  so in a sense that's another useful function.  you don't actually have to go to the internet provider.  you can use that information as leverage to get a lower price  at the retail store that you're at.  >> exactly.  i think that the discount is definitely worth it  for bigger ticket items like the televisions, but really based  on my results at least there wasn't much  of a price difference for smaller items like coffee  or detergent or t-shirts.  so for that maybe the price matching might not be necessary.  >> i found the same thing.  coffee, detergent, these lower ticket items,  things that were less than twenty u.s. dollars or so,  weren't showing much of a difference.  >> right. right.  >> so if you could think about kind of the future  of these price searching tools,  what would be some areas for improvement?  how could they work better?  >> right. so i think that, you know, what we were talking  about before with the difficulty that we were running in to  with actually scanning the items or finding a lot  of different data on it, i think that's one  of the big areas for improvement.  a lot more stores could enter in their data for their prices just  so that consumers could have access to more information.  >> i agree.  i agree. and it's -- one of the limitations is  that not all retailers are members of the redlaser family.  so it has this app.  now it has about, what, 27-30 million users.  as it gets more users, not only customers,  but more retailers associated with this network,  it might gain added utility.  so this app may look very different,  may have more functionality, in a year or two from now.  >> the other unique thing i noticed was  that not many other people in the stores were using this app.  just in general when i go shopping i don't see a lot  of people using it.  so i don't know what could help increase users or --  >> that's a good point.  as we've talked about earlier in this course, a large number  of americans check prices, check prices online, but it seems  to be using different technologies.  either a laptop or an ipad or perhaps using your smart phone  but going to the retailer's website.  right. so this seems  to be something that's still a work in progress.  but definitely promising.  >> absolutely.  >> well, that's what we found.  we look forward to hearing your results. 
[ music ]  >> hi. let's talk about the thingiverse exercise.  first of all, let's provide some background  about thingiverse itself.  the thingiverse website began in 2008.  it was launched by makerbot,  the company that democratized 3d printing, and the idea here is  to provide an itunes store for objects.  so instead of songs, this site has designs  that can be 3d printed.  and instead of costing 99 cents, these designs are free.  one thing that's unique about this website is that nearly all  of the designs have been submitted  by individuals rather than companies.  currently, there's about 700,000 designs available  for 3d printing.  they cover a range of categories from toys and games  to useful household items.  so you're bound to find something that interests you.  now the purpose of this exercise is to gain hands-on experience  with 3d printing  and to understand how this technology will affect marketing  but also product placement in particular.  i found thingiverse to be especially useful in terms  of getting items that can't be found elsewhere.  so, for example, i printed this unique pencil holder  using thingiverse.  it's a design that was uploaded a few years ago.  printed here on this 3d printer, and people walk in all the time  in my office, say where did you get this.  i can't find this in the store,  and i tell them about thingiverse.  so let's talk about how this exercise works.  first of all, go to your browser or simply, you can type  in the search box or simply type in the website address,  and it's thingiverse t-h-i-n-g-i-v-e-r-s-e dot com.  here we go, and you'll see the home page of thingiverse,  and there are a variety of ways  in which you can navigate this page.  first of all, you can hit explore,  and you see a variety of submenus.  if you go to things, you'll see number of boxes,  and each box is a particular design that you could 3d print.  you go under this category, you have variety of search terms.  so you can either search under the newest  and most recently uploaded designs, you can search  under popular designs,  or designs that have been featured by makerbot.  you can also click random designs.  this is a new function.  it gets some random objects displayed.  you can also do a more focused search, again,  go back to explore, and you can hit the categories submenu,  and here you have different categories of objects.  so we have toys and games, we have fashion, art,  household items, and even items for 3d printing.  so 3d printers print their own replacement parts, for example.  a third way to navigate this website is  to employ the search box  in which you enter a search term and see what pops up.  so let's give that a try.  so my last name is rhineflesh.  so in high school my nickname was rhino,  and so that's my favorite animal is the rhinoceros.  so let me type in the word rhino and see what comes up.  ok. ok. actually we have 407 different results for rhino,  and you probably will find similar a large number  of results for the item that you search on.  so we have different types of rhinoceroses.  ok. so a wide variety of choices here.  some functional; some aesthetic.  actually i like this one, one of these early ones.  this rhino 3d scan.  this looks interesting.  so just click on the design that interests you,  and you'll get the home page for that particular design,  and you'll see a number  of interesting information on this home page.  you'll see the name of the design.  you'll also see the name of the designer, and if you click  on this, you'll get more information about the designer,  and if you click on this,  you'll get more information about the designer.  we'll come back to this momentarily.  you'll also get information about the number of views.  how often this page has been viewed.  in this case, a bit over 2,000 views, and next to it the number  of times this object has been downloaded for 3d printing.  so here we have about 600 downloads of this item,  and we also have the upload date, which was january 7th,  which was not very long ago.  so this is actually quite a few downloads for a recent design.  let's click on the designer's name, see what we find.  and here you find the designer.  this individual is using a more  of a corporate name called idea beans.  we can see that this person has submitted 35 designs,  achieved 440 likes, and that they're located  in auckland, new zealand.  you go back, we can go back to the design itself.  so what you need to do in terms of the exercise once you settle  on a design that you like is simply take the name  of the design.  you can copy and paste this as well as the url,  which has the thing number.  this is the number, the item number  in which this design had been assigned.  now take both of those pieces of information and either type them  or copy and paste them into the course web page in the boxes  that we have provided for this exercise.  also, and in addition to that,  please take a look at the description.  now the items vary in terms of their descriptions,  but see how the product is described,  and you might find some very interesting  background information.  so what's really interesting about this particular design,  if you see here, there's two rhinoceroses.  there's one that looks like a statute  and one that's [inaudible], looks like a 3d print, and,  indeed, that's what this is.  as we see from this description  that this individual actually scanned this statute.  he scanned the statute because he had actually had fallen,  and one of the legs of the rhino had broken.  so he wanted to scan the design to preserve it  in case something happened to it.  and so we see both images here, and also if you click on some  of the images, you'll see different portrayals  of the design.  so we have here the actual picture of the 3d object as well  as the original object, and usually you'll see on,  for each design a blue image which is the 3d design image  of the product, of the design that can be printed.  and so the print should look something  like this except it probably won't be  in blue unless you decide to print using blue filament.  the other thing we like to you  to take a look at is the comments.  this is the comment box.  this is a fairly new design so there's not many comments,  and this just gives you some idea in terms  of what people are saying about the design, and here,  there's actually two comments.  the first comment is very complementary.  it's thanking this person saying they actually, they had,  their team had received a trophy, a rhino trophy,  and they're printing this  out to have a physical memento of that trophy.  and then the second comment is actually a question,  which is asking the designer what they used,  what technology they used  to scan this particular statute, ok.  so once you, going back in the instructions,  once you upload the name of the design and the url,  we'll go back to the design here, the url,  you can cut and paste.  alright here, cut and paste that.  right up top.  alright. also please take a look at, again, at the comments.  if you own a 3d printer, that's great.  if you don't, and you're looking for a 3d printer,  there's a great website that you can use.  it's hot linked on our website.  the website is shown here.  it's called 3d hubs dot com, and this website has connections  to over 10,000 3d printers across the globe.  so to find a 3d printer next to you, just simply go  to this green aquamarine box, click on that,  and once this comes up, you can type in your actual location.  so say you happen to be in moscow.  i talked to moscow earlier.  you can actually get a list  of all the 3d printers located close to the moscow area.  as we can see here, there's over a dozen 3d printers  within six kilometers of central moscow,  and then you simply can click on each of these listed printers  to get more information about the location, the price,  and the time it will take to 3d print.  you can find a printer next to you  and actually turn your design into an actual physical object.  in terms of the assignment,  we like you to do four things in particular.  first of all, please, again, record the name  and the address of this design.  second, we'd like you to classify this object in terms  of one of the four categories  that we discussed about 3d printing.  so is this a replacement, a substitute,  a solution, or is it a creation?  so those are the four categories.  we'd also like you to think  about why you selected this particular design?  what were the reasons that you picked this  over the many other options?  and, finally, provide some thoughts about how thingiverse  or a website like it, a website library  of designs will affect product placement.  i look forward to hearing your responses. 
[ music ]  >> hi. let's talk about the wikipedia exercise.  i had some difficulty finding the right example  for this particular exercise.  there are so many to choose from.  after considerable thought, i decided to go ahead  with wikipedia which i'm sure you're familiar with.  although it's not a traditional firm,  wikipedia has many firm-like qualities.  for example, it has a large hierarchy of managers,  although these managers are volunteers not paid managers.  wikipedia is also a global brand that's well-known.  it launches several new offerings every single day.  wikipedia itself was launched in 2001 with the goal of containing  and collecting the world's entire body of knowledge,  so instead of having a traditional encyclopedia  which was written traditionally by professors or scientists,  to create an online encyclopedia that was written  by all of us, by everybody.  since that time, it's been a success story unquestioned.  today, wikipedia has over 34 million entries  across over 200 different languages.  i didn't even know there were 200 languages in the world.  in terms of actual knowledge, wikipedia has  as much information as 15,000 volumes of encyclopedia.  that's a lot of information.  wikipedia is also one  of the world's top 10 most visited websites  with over 500 million visitors every single month.  that's impressive.  here at the university  of illinois almost every student uses wikipedia at least  at some point in their educational experience.  in fact, i use wikipedia to prepare  for this exercise myself.  now, with this background let's go ahead and talk  about how do this exercise.  first of all, go to your internet browser,  in this case i happen to be in firefox  and just type in wikipedia.  that's right, wikipedia and go to the link  and what you'll see here on this homepage there's a variety  of different languages.  it has the more popular languages listed here  around the wikipedia globe.  if your language is not listed, you can simply type the language  in here or use the pulldown menu.  in this case, since i speak english i'll go ahead  and hit the english page  and here you have the homepage of wikipedia.  the next thing you have to do is think about a topic  that you want to contribute knowledge to.  what i would recommend, because wikipedia is quite mature  with 34 million entries, it's going to be hard to find a topic  that hasn't been covered, so what i recommend is that you,  rather than creating a new topic, go ahead  and add knowledge to an existing topic to enhance it.  so, you can go to the search box and enter in a topic  that interests you, so for example, i'm going to enter  in the name of my hometown.  i was raised in a town called farmington, connecticut  and it's the town that i lived in for over 20 years  so i have some knowledge of, so let me see  if i can contribute some knowledge  to the entry from my hometown.  so, the search box here at the upper right, i simply type  in farmington and then ct for connecticut  and here i see the entry on the top  and this has some information about the town, it's history,  some more information about the institutions, art museums,  and so forth and the town hospitals,  an entry about geography, some demographic information,  information about the economy, famous places,  educational institutions, and notable people and i point  out that i am not on this list.  alright, so actually i had made an entry  to this website some time ago and what i want  to do is go back and enhance my entry.  but before it go ahead, i want to point  out one additional feature of wikipedia that you may want  to consider and it's not required, but you may want  to consider actually creating an account if you don't have one  and to log in when you make your entry and the benefit  of that is if, as well see shortly,  that wikipedia captures a log of all entries  and the page managers, every page has a page manager  at some level, we'll often times look at these entries  and are more likely to approve and not change entries  that have an actual user name rather  than an anonymous ip address.  so, i'm going since i want my entry to be preserved,  i'm going to go ahead and log in.  i've created an account earlier,  if you don't have a wikipedia account you can join wikipedia  and create an account it's very easy,  you just need an authorizing address;  here i have my username,  i'm going to enter my password so i'll log in.  okay. so, i'm now logged in and the log in shows right  up here with my username.  now, once you decide on which wikipedia page,  which entry you'd like to create edits for,  as a first step you should take a look at this tab  on the upper right, the view history tab.  and this tab will give you a listing of changes made  and see i have a number of information here  such as the time and the date in which the change was made,  the ip address, the username  of the individual making the change,  and there's more information about the change itself  and what happened to it.  so, here you'll see actual edits that were made  and that were changed by another user or a system administrator  for the page, so even though an entry may not be reflected  on the page, perhaps someone tried  to make an entry and it was rejected.  so, this can give you a sense of what has been allowed  in the past, what has been rejected, and something you get  to look at before you make your particular entry.  so, once you look at the history and you can actually go  to the page and you have next to it an edit tab, edit tab here,  and once you see the edit tab you will notice  that it looks quite different than the regular wikipedia page,  so just to show you the contrast,  i'll go to the read page and this is what wikipedia looks  like normally what we used to see, alright.  then once you go the edit page, right, you're actually  into the coding the html type of entry.  so, you can scroll down you have some, alright, some entries  to help guide you to where you're at, alright,  and so i'm interested  in actually editing the geography portion.  so, one of my hobbies is rock climbing, so i'm going to go  into the wikipedia page and make some entries  into the passes i edited earlier about rock climbing spots  in the connecticut area.  so, i'm going to take off my glasses  so i can read the small text and scrolling down  and we have geography right here and it's a few paragraphs  and i'm going to talk here about the climbing areas, alright,  so here in this entry i made earlier i talk about a number  of climbing areas and that it's in a book  that references those climbing areas.  so, what we're going to do now is simply go in  and provide some actual names.  i don't talk about the names of the areas, the actual names.  so, the rock walls and chimneys, so we could technical climbing  in places such as pinnacle rock and the green wall  and these are two known places for rock climbing  in the farmington area.  so, i go ahead, i've made those changes  in this entry right here, alright.  now i'm going to at the bottom,  hit save page you can also do a preview if you'd like,  i'm just going to save that entry.  and then it takes me back once i save back to the read tab  and i'm just go down to make sure that the entry  that i made is indeed there  and that i haven't made a typographical mistake.  so, i'm down to geography and let's see.  oh, here it is.  places such as pinnacle rock  and the green wall, so it's that easy.  i've updated the farmington, connecticut wikipedia entry.  now, i didn't need to log in to do that.  you don't need to create an account or log in,  you can edit this without taking that step, but i'm hoping  that by logging in that having a name there rather  than just an anonymous ip address  that the page administrator is more likely to keep my edits.  so, i'm going to check back in about a day or so and see  if those edits are still there  and perhaps you can check this webpage as well to see  if it's still there when you take the course.  so, that's what you need to do find a topic  that you have interest in, make your entry,  and then i can go back just like i'm going to do in 24 hours  and to see what happened to it.  let's talk about the exercise itself in terms  of beyond just doing the exercise what you need  to do to get credit for it.  there are 4 things i would like you do.  first of all, record your wikipedia entry what the name  of the page that you edited.  it would also be nice if you could cut and paste the url  into the location on the course webpage.  number 2, talk a bit about why you picked this particular topic  versus any of the other 34 million possible entries.  i picked this because i grew up in farmington and i happen  to know a lot about the town and i like living there.  third, talk a bit about what happened to the contribution,  again go back 24 hours later  and what happened to your contribution.  was it still there?  was it taken down?  did you receive any sort of, if you have an email account  that you've entered, a log in account,  did you receive a message  from a page administrator asking you about your entry?  what happened?  and finally, what did you learn about user generated content  from this particular exercise?  what did you learn also about wikipedia?  do you have a different opinion about wikipedia  than you had before you did this exercise?  if you're like many  of our students you have used wikipedia many times  in the past, but this will be your first time actually  contributing to wikipedia as a user.  i look forward to seeing your entries  and hearing what you learn from this exercise. 
>> this concludes our course on marketing in a digital world.  i hope that you learned some new concepts,  acquired some new tools and heard some new stories.  more importantly, i hope this course provided you  with some new insights about how new digital tools,  such as the internet, smart phone  and 3d printer are changing the marketing landscape.  to wrap up, here are the four key lessons from this course;  first, marketing is a process of value exchange  that is facilitated by the four ps, product, promotion,  placement and price; second, the tools employed  in enacting the four ps are increasingly becoming digital,  now being democratized across a large number of consumers;  third, this digitization  and democratization is shifting the balance of power from firms  to consumers; fourth, as a result, firms are losing control  over the marketing mix and consumers are taking  on a more active and expensive role in marketing activities.  there are many courses in our digital marketing specialization  that will examine this new digital world in more detail.  the next course in our specialization,  digital analytics and theory in practice will introduce you  to the art and science of web analytics.  this course will provide the foundation needed  to apply data analytics to a wide variety  of digital marketing challenges.  thank you for participating in this course.  i hope you enjoy the rest of our specialization. 
[ music ]  >> welcome to marketing in a digital world.  thank you for participating in this course.  i'd like to begin by providing an overview of the course,  where we are going, and what you will learn.  first, let's discuss what this course will not cover.  this is not an e-commerce class.  we will not examine social media analytics,  search engine optimization, or other digital marketing tactics.  the other courses in our digital marketing specialization will  cover these topics in great detail.  this course will be broader in scope and focus  on how digital tools such as the internet, smartphones,  and 3d printers are changing the marketing landscape.  in essence, these tools are shifting the balance of power  from firms to consumers.  we will examine these tools, introduce some new concepts,  and tell some stories about how both firms  and consumers are adapting to this changing landscape.  this course consists of four modules.  each module will explore one key foundation in marketing  and examine how this foundation is being altered  by these digital tools.  in module 1, we'll examine how digital tools are enabling  customers to co-create the products  and brands that they consume.  we call this our product module.  in module 2, we'll focus on how these tools are changing the way  that products are being promoted and the role of users  in generating content for these promotional activities.  hence, this is our promotion module.  in module 3, we'll take a look at the digitization  of product distribution and the changing nature  of the retail landscape.  we call this our placement module.  finally, in module 4,  we'll examine new digital-enabled tools  and techniques that are helping customers take more control  over the price they pay for the products that they buy.  this is our price module.  we'll examine each of these four modules using a variety  of learning modalities including video lectures, case studies,  hands-on exercises, and interviews  with both students and faculty.  the student interviews are discussions  with the students here at the university of illinois.  we asked these members  of the internet generation how they currently use digital tools  to navigate the marketplace.  we call this feature "views from the quad."  the faculty interviews are discussions with some  of our world-class faculty here at the university of illinois.  these faculty are doing cutting-edge research  on the next generation of digital tools.  we call this feature "campus spotlight."  by engaging in these various learning activities,  you will increase your appreciation  of how the foundations of marketing are being reshaped  and shifting to fit our new digital world.  more specifically, there are four key lessons  that i hope you take away from this course.  first of all, marketing is a process of value exchange  that is facilitated by the four ps: product,  promotion, placement, and price.  second, the tools employed  in enacting the four ps are increasingly becoming digital  and are being democratized  across a large number of consumers.  third, this digitization  and democratization is shifting the balance of power  from firms to consumers.  and finally, as a result, firms are losing control  over the marketing mix and consumers are taking  on a more active and expansive role  across these various marketing activities.  finally, i hope this course will provide a firm foundation  for the rest of the courses in our specialization.  are you ready?  great. let's get started. 
[ music ]  >> hi. i'd like to share a few thoughts  about the pepsi refresh case.  the purpose of this case is to assess the success  of digital marketing campaigns,  and also to illustrate the concept of authenticity.  hopefully, at this point in time, you have had a chance  to do the reading and have a look  at the pepsi refresh commercial linked on the course page.  let me provide a bit more background to this case.  the pepsi refresh project was launched in january, 2010.  at that point in time, pepsi decided--  made a strategic decision--  to take the budget that it typically uses  for its annual advertisement--  the super bowl is in late january,  early february every year-- and took that $1.3 million dollars,  and instead of running an ad, like it usually does,  to take this money and devote to fun, social causes.  to do this, it created a new website called  refresheverything.com, in which anyone  in the world could submit a proposal for a social project  such as sending care packages to soldiers overseas,  or building a new playground for children.  these proposals were voted on by visitors to the website,  and based on these votes,  pepsi picked winning submissions every month.  this website received lots of traffic within the first month,  1,000 submissions, and in total,  by the time this promotion ended, the website had  over 18 million unique visitors, 80 million votes,  and generated nearly 150,000 tweets.  which brings us to the core issue in this case.  this project has received lots of submissions  and has helped fund a number of worthwhile social initiatives.  that's good stuff.  the core issue is, how has this promotional campaign benefitted  the pepsi brand itself?  so, i'd like you to focus on three particular questions.  first of all, what should be the criteria  to evaluate a digital marketing promotional campaign  such as pepsi refresh?  second, was the pepsi refresh successful?  why, or why not?  and finally, what should pepsi do about this project?  i look forward to hearing your thoughts. 
[ music ]  >> hi. let's talk about the radiohead case.  the purpose of this case is to better understand the costs  and benefits of a pay what you want pricing strategy.  let's begin with some background.  in october of 2007, the famous british rock band radiohead  released its new album titled "in rainbows".  at the time of this release,  radiohead had just ended its contract  with its recording company and decided  to self-release this new album.  so it made this album available for download on its website.  this was innovative distribution decision.  however, what was even more innovative was its decision  to allow its fans to download this album  for any price they wanted, even for free.  this strategy was so new and different  that it created a whole new pricing strategy called pay what  you want or pwyw.  as a point of reference, if radiohead had sold its album  through a recording company, it would be priced  for about 14.99 us dollars.  if radiohead were to receive about 15 percent  of this total, for about $2.25.  radiohead share would be even less, about $1.40 us,  if this album was sold via itunes.  now this presents to the core issue of this case.  this innovative pricing approach obtained a lot of attention  for radiohead and excited lots of music fans,  but the core issue is the degree  to which this was a good pricing strategy for radiohead itself.  in particular, i'd like you to focus  on three questions responding to this case.  first of all, was the pay what you want strategy a good  business decision for radiohead?  second of all, what could radiohead have done  to make the strategy even more effective?  and, finally, is the pay what you want strategy something  that could be employed by more traditional firms?  i look forward to your responses. 
[ music ]  >> hi. let's talk about the threadless case.  threadless is one of my favorite retailers.  i bought many of their products.  in fact, i'm wearing a threadless t-shirt right now.  let me show it to you.  this particular t-shirt is called,  "larry the fox doesn't feel so clever anymore",  and it was designed by a fellow named paul otters [phonetic].  so, this larry the fox, here, in brown,  and he's in this tree-lined scene.  and if you look closely, you can see a number of black  and white animals such as a zebra,  we have a panda, and some penguins.  so, we can't see them because they're camouflaged,  so i guess he doesn't feel so clever anymore.  well, the purpose of this case is to examine the relationship  between online versus in-store retailing,  and to better understand how digital tools are changing the  retail landscape.  we talk first, a bit about threadless the company.  threadless is a very innovative clothing manufacturer located  in chicago.  this company specializes in making  and selling unique t-shirts, such as this one.  the company was founded in 2000 by jake nickell,  and uses customer co-creation to design their t-shirts.  specifically, it uses a submission process very similar  to what [inaudible] uses.  however, the difference here, is that in addition  to using this process to solicit designs, it also uses submission  to help select which designs to produce.  this is a very selective process.  only about 1 percent  of all submitted designs are actually selected for printing.  these shirts are typically made in the u.s.a.  and sell for around $25 each.  since threadless was founded,  it has sold its products almost exclusively via its website,  which is the same site  which designs are solicited and voted upon.  through this approach, it has experienced phenomenal growth.  in recent years, threadless has received substantial interest  from several large retailers such as target,  and is also considering the possibility  of opening its own retail stores.  this brings us to the core issue of the case.  during its first decade of operation,  threadless has been very successful selling its  shirts online.  the core issue is if, and how should threadless expand its  distribution capacity?  we have particular questions i'd like you to consider.  first of all, should threadless move  into physical, retail distribution?  second, if so, how?  should it open its own store,  or sell through an existing, established retailer?  and finally, what should be the relationship between its online  versus its physical distribution channel?  [ silence ] 
>> now let's take a look at some academic insights.  the topic of authenticity has become quite popular  in recent years, thus there was quite a lot of research  on this topic and lots of studies we could examine.  i'd like to focus on two recent  and very interesting studies in this domain.  the first study was published in 2014 in the journal  of marketing research; this study was conducted  by two professors at yale university and contains a series  of experiments that examine how the authenticity  of your product's origin impacts consumer behavior  and perceptions.  for example, in one of their experiments,  they examined perceptions of levi jeans  across two groups of participants.  both groups were first shown a photo of levis jeans.  the first group was told that these jeans were made  in levis' original factory in san francisco, california,  while the second group was told that the jeans were made  in a newer factory located outside  of the u.s. these researchers found that the participants  in the original factory group rated the jeans  as more authentic and willing to pay more for them compared  to the -- compared to those in the newer factory group.  the results of this study suggests  that authenticity is affected by the way a firm promotes  and represents its products to their consumers.  it also shows that consumers are willing to pay and to pay more  for authentic products;  this perhaps also provides some insights  and tell why apple promotes its products  as being designed in california.  the second study was published in 2015  in a journal called the review of marketing research,  i think it was a really fascinating paper;  in this recent study, a group of marketing scholars  at western university in canada conducted a series  of examinations about brand authenticity.  let's discuss two of their studies.  in the first study, these scholars examined --  they asked 100 participants to identify brands  that they feel are inauthentic  and then provide reasons why they feel this way.  the results of this first study revealed  that there are two key factors  that make brands seem inauthentic.  these two factors are, first of all,  imitation and second, mismatch.  i'll explain each of these.  imitation occurs when a brand is seen as copying another brand;  for example, several of the participants  in the study viewed the clothing firm, american eagle,  as simply a cheaper copy,  a knockoff of abercrombie and fitch.  now let's take a look at the second concept, mismatch;  mismatch is when a brand's projected image doesn't  match reality.  for example, several participants in the study said  that martha stewart's image  as a perfect homemaker doesn't really match the fact  that she is in actually, a convicted criminal.  now that we've examined these academic insights,  let's take a look at some practical things  that firms can do to leverage digital authenticity.  first of all, perhaps most importantly, just be yourself.  the american actress judy garland once said,  be a first rate version of yourself,  not a second grade version of someone else.  this is good advice.  indeed, psychologists tell us that people who are true  to their inner self are typically happier  and feel more fulfilled than those trying  to be something that they're not.  the same principle also applies to firms.  companies that are true to their heritage  and their current reality are most likely to be viewed  as inauthentic and as a result, should be more likely  to obtain [inaudible] responses from their customers.  in contrast, firms that try to imitate others  or present their brands of something that they're not,  often find themselves in trouble.  for example, mcdonalds has got into trouble by trying  to portray itself  as a restaurant full of healthy choices.  as recently noted by carlos garcia, the ceo of nobox,  which is a digital consulting company,  consumers can smell inauthenticity.  number two, be consistent.  once a firm tells its authentic story, it needs to stick  with its story, even if it seems unpopular at times.  for example, during the recent great recession,  many americans cut back  on making large discretionary purchases.  as a result, many companies responded to the recession  by offering discounts  or offering lower priced versions of their products.  in contrast, the american motorcycle company,  harley davidson, responded in a different way,  they actually responded to this challenge  by reinforcing its image as a symbol of freedom and rebellion  and through their ads, told americans --  and this is their quote -- fear sucks and doesn't last long,  that's a great example of authentic response.  authentic promotions also need to present a consistent story  across all of its different promotional vehicles,  both online and offline.  for example, stella artois consistently conveys its story  as a belgium beer that was founded way back in 1366 --  sorry -- 1366 across all of its platforms, including television,  commercials, social media postings, its web page  and even on its bottle.  this is important because inconsistent stories confuse  consumers and often make them suspicious  and suspicious customers are never a good thing.  three, admit your mistakes.  another part of being authentic is being able to admit  when you're wrong, when you've made a mistake.  for example, dominos pizza publicly admitted  that its pizza wasn't very good  and that they were working hard to make them better.  so for example, they created a series of ads and videos  that showed actual people trying their pizza;  this campaign was a great success  and helped dominos increase,  both its revenues and also its profits.  indeed, firms that admit their mistakes are most likely  to have this mistake made public by someone else.  if that occurs, this mistake becomes much more embarrassing  and more costly in the long run.  for example, after united airlines refused to admit  that they broke his guitar, the canadian musician dave carroll,  wrote a song about this incident;  the song is called united breaks guitars.  he released this song on youtube;  this video has received nearly 15 million views  and has resulted in substantial embarrassment  for united airlines.  fourth and finally, use your customers.  one of the key themes throughout this course is the role  of digital tools in transforming customers and passes recipients  to active participants in the marketing process,  thus firms can employ the help of their customers  to both crafts and also communicate authentic  promotional campaigns.  a good example of this is jones soda, its customers create all  of its company's promotional videos,  thus these ads are inherently authentic  and also have the advantage of being completely free.  well, those are my thoughts about digital authenticity.  i'd like to hear your thoughts about this fascinating topic  and also your examples. 
[ music ]  >> now that we have this basic definition, let's take a bit  of a deeper dive into some more specific concepts  about customer co-creation.  it's a fascinating topic and i'm doing some research  in this domain.  so there are lots of things we could talk about,  but for purpose of our discussion, i want to focus  on three issues in particular.  first of all, what are the steps involved  in customer co-creation?  second of all, what motivates customers  to engage in this activity?  and thirdly, what are some different types  of customer co-creation?  so, first of all, let's talk about the steps involved  in the co-creation process.  successful co-creation requires two key steps.  first of all, a firm must convince its customers  to submit their ideas, to give them contributions.  so, contributions is the first step.  second, once it receives these contributions,  it must then select the few valuable ones for the many  that are less valuable.  so we think of this second step as a selection process.  so you think about, again, customer co-creation as,  first of all, getting contributions and second of all,  selecting the good from the bad.  now, this may sound quite simple -- these two basic steps --  but in actuality, both of these processes are quite challenging,  but for different reasons.  first of all, getting contribution is actually quite  hard because most customers, like you, are quite busy  and typically care very little about your products.  they don't have much incentive  to spend their valuable time giving you ideas  to benefit your company.  as a result, most co-creation efforts fail  because they don't get many submissions.  no one gives them any ideas.  second of all, once you get ideas --  if you are successful with getting contributions,  the selection process is actually quite challenging.  because most submissions are not very useful --  there may be ideas that you have thought about before,  maybe too idiosyncratic for a given customer  that may alienate other customers,  or maybe they are too expensive.  as a result, firms face a very difficult task of having  to reject customer submissions and risk the danger  of creating bad will that some  of the most highly engaged customers  who are giving them ideas --  having to reject these valuable ideas.  thus, in order to be successful at co-creation,  firms must both -- first of all --  convince customers to give them ideas, and then, second,  have a way of rejecting these ideas  without alienating their customer base.  second of all -- the second [inaudible] we like to talk  about is how to motivate customers  to engage in this activity.  so why would a customer spend their valuable time  to give a firm ideas?  there are two main methods for motivating customers to engage  in co-creation: first of all, social recognition,  and second of all, financial reward.  most firms that are successful  in customer co-creation employ both the social  and the financial incentives.  usually, these rewards go  to customers whose contributions have been selected.  so, only those few whose ideas are being used are  typically rewarded.  for example, customers who submit winning designs  to threadless t-shirts receive both a $2,500  in monetary incentives;  they also receive the intentional benefit  of having their name printed on the back of the t-shirt's label.  so each t-shirt that is designed using your submission carries  your name.  now let's talk a bit about different types of co-creation.  co-creation is a large category and there are lots  of different types of activity within this broader category.  this comes from some recent research that i have conducted  with my former doctoral student, matt o'hearn.  matt is now at the university of new hampshire.  he is a faculty member there.  and we have published an article  that identifies four different types of co-creation based  on a two-by-two matrix.  >> here is a picture of our matrix.  as you can see, it is based on the two key steps  in the customer co-creation process.  so, on the x axis we have the contribution step.  on the y axis we have the selection step.  and with each of these axis, we have both a high  and a low degree of customer control over each process.  so you see under contribution, the first box is fixed,  which means that the customer has very little control  over the contribution process and the firm will fix the types  of contribution that it wants.  for example, the size of the contribution could be the color.  it could be a particular design.  the next box, open, indicates  that the firm has much less control over the process  and allows a much wider range of types of customer contributions.  in essence, customers are able to contribute just  about anything that they would like.  i would say the same thing under selection.  under the firm-led process, it is largely the firm  that does the selection activity.  the firm picks the winning submissions.  in the customer-led category, the firm relies more  on the customers to select the winning submissions.  so it could be, for example, based on a customer vote,  number of points, number of thumbs up -- that sort of thing.  this provides -- this two-by-two matrix provides four different  types of customer co-creation.  so at the very extremes, we have the bottom left submissions,  in which a firm maintains tight control  over both contribution and selection.  and on the other extreme, on the far upper right,  we have collaborating, in which the firm releases much control  over both contribution and selection.  and in between these, on the off diagonal,  we have co-designing and tinkering.  in the article that we have assigned,  attached to this video lecture,  we go into more details about this matrix.  let me provide a few more details in terms  of both some concrete examples, as well as a discussion  of the process by how these different mechanisms work,  because there is some differences  in terms of how they work.  so, a few examples.  so, first of all, a good example of collaborating --  we talked about apache -- about open source software,  in general, is a great example because both the contributions  and the selection processes are largely open and determined  by the customer user base.  so that's a great example of collaborating.  we talked about little big planet.  this is a good example of the tinkering process because, here,  we have -- if you recall -- under tinkering, we have more  of a firm-led selection process.  so we have -- in little big planet,  although the users are creating the platform,  the firm has control over which ones it selects  to actually be published and distributed.  we move on to the two other examples  of customer co-creation -- designing and in sharing.  we talked a bit about threadless t-shirt --  a great example of the designing process.  so, in threadless, the community votes on the winning designs  but the actual contributions are constrained in terms  of the design and it has to be a t-shirt.  so you can't design a mug.  you can't design an umbrella.  it has to be a t-shirt and a certain color scheme  and a certain design template.  so what you'll see, even though threadless t-shirts are designed  -- each t-shirt is designed by a different designer,  just about -- you'll see a very consistent look  from one t-shirt to the other.  finally, sharing.  so we go back to our matrix.  we'll see that in sharing you have both fixed contributions,  but also firm-led selection.  so this is the most constrained of the four types  of customer co-creation.  let me talk about this one example that you see before you.  this is actually from electrolux.  and can you guess what this -- this is an appliance --  what type of appliance this is?  it's not apparent by its -- by this picture.  but if you look in the background,  it might give you some hints.  so this is actually a new appliance that is designed  to provide an alternative means of drying your clothes.  so, almost a home form of dry cleaning, in which instead  of the typical drying process that would dry  by heating your clothes, this device releases positive ions  that would break up the dirt, clean it, and dry it over time.  and this device was not just developed by electrolux,  but was part of what they call a design lab competition  that they hold every year.  and, typically, the submissions for this competition are done  by engineering students across the world.  so this particular design was developed a few years ago  by a taiwanese undergraduate engineering student.  so electrolux will sponsor this competition.  it is very defined in terms of the submissions have to be  about appliances that have some potential market value.  and then all of the designs are voted  on by a small panel of electrolux judges.  so both the contributions  and the selections are very tightly controlled  by electrolux.  and we have a website for all of these different examples.  you can browse for additional information.  now let's talk a little bit about the actual processes  by how each of these techniques work.  so we're going to group collaborating and tinkering,  because these are the kind of more extreme forms  that firms have less control over.  and then also we will then look at sharing and co-designing.  so here, we have a flow chart that talks  about the process from start to finish.  and if you look at both of these,  there is quite some similarities in terms of the processes.  so we have a firm releasing something that is developed  and then we have a second step in which some  of the customers -- again, not all of the customers,  but some of the customers -- usually a small percentage,  typically 10% or less, will take that initial offering  and modify it or suggest changes in some way.  and then other customers --  usually these changes are transparent  and a broader customer base will see these contributions  and they can either vote on them or further modify them.  and then, over time, the firm  or the project team will see both the contributions as well  as the broader market reaction to these contributions  and then engage in some sort of selection process.  so you see collaborating on the figure on the left.  the key difference here is that the --  in tinkering, you have a firm releasing a final product.  like with sony, the little big planet video game worked.  this was a workable game that anyone could use  without tinkering with it.  in collaborating, typically a project is not viable.  it's usually what is called the source code.  it's a minimal foundation in which to launch a product.  so that's one distinction between the two is  in collaborating, the product is usually at an earlier stage  of development, and then also that in phase four,  there is another distinction between these two steps.  with tinkering, the firm typically doesn't change.  the firm is the firm and customers don't become the firm.  but in collaborating, if you are a very active contributor  and you have shown that you have made significant contributions  to a source code, you could actually become part  of the project team.  so in that sense, by becoming part of the firm itself,  we have a much more active  and much more decentralized selection process.  now let's talk about the remaining two types  of co-creation: co-designing and sharing.  and again, these two types have quite a bit in common.  we see co-designing on the left and sharing on the right.  in both of these, we have users or customers  who are submitting ideas to a firm, ideas or designs,  and then we have a selection process.  so in co-designing, typically the community has a strong voice  in selecting the contributions that should go forward.  so we saw it with threadless.  we have the actual votes and comments  by customers play a big role in the selection process.  in the sharing example -- we used electrolux earlier --  it's simply a small team,  typically of corporate executives,  who make the selection process.  so that's a fundamental difference.  and then, from that, a very similar process afterwards  in which the selections are basically either integrated  into an existent design or launched  as a stand-alone commercial product.  so those are the four types of customer co-creation.  hopefully these examples  and these process models give you a deeper insight  into how they work and where they are effective. 
[music]  finally let's talk about some academic insights  about the doppelganger brand image.  this is a new domain so research is still building.  we don't know quite a lot  about this new innovation technique yet.  however a few key insights are starting to emerge.  i'd like to discuss two studies in particular,  one that was conducted about a decade ago by myself and some  of my colleagues at the university of wisconsin,  my prior institution, and a more recent one.  the first article was a research study that i conducted  with my two former colleagues at the university of wisconsin.  this was a study that kicked off the concept  of a doppelganger brand image.  we created this concept in this article.  in this research we focused on starbucks,  using a qualitative study.  and what we did is we observed and interviewed thirty patrons  of local coffee shops, both in wisconsin and illinois.  and we asked them a number of questions.  one of the things we asked them was,  "why do you like this particular local coffee shop?"  and although we never mentioned the term starbucks,  every single individual that we interviewed said  that they liked their local coffee shop  because it wasn't starbucks.  that's what they liked about it, that it wasn't starbucks.  when we conducted a deeper investigation we found  that almost all of these consumers had made impressions  of starbucks due to its dbi,  in particular the doppelganger image  that starbucks lacked authenticity by trying to take  on the image of being an intimate local coffee shop while  in actuality being one of the largest global brands  in the world in which shops are almost the same everywhere you  go and lacking local distinction.  so this article, this initial article, provides evidence  that dbis may negatively impact a consumer's willingness  to buy a brand because we find -- we've found this is why,  because of its image, that these customers were using a local  coffee shop instead of visiting starbucks.  the second article i'd like to highlight is a more recent  article by markus giesler at york university.  in this article markus focuses on the dbi associated  with the marketing of the botox cosmetic.  botox is a -- understand, a compound.  actually i believe it's a very dangerous compound  that is injected in to the skin to reduce wrinkles.  so this study was a longitudinal study  that examined botox's marketing campaigns  over an eight year period from 2002 to 2010  and also the doppelganger images that were used  against this brand over this timeframe.  and this article reveals that the dbis can shift over time  in response to changing marketing claims.  and it also shows that managers can use a variety of tactics  to combat dbis such as fostering brand communities  and using customers to help market their brands.  now let's talk about practical recommendations in terms  of what a firm can do if they're faced  with a doppelganger brand image.  well, first of all, all firms whether faced with a dbi  or not should be monitoring digital cues.  firms should view a dbi not just as a threat,  but also an opportunity to ensure  that their brands stay relevant.  they can take advantage of this opportunity  by carefully monitoring digital cues  for any potential signs of trouble.  so, for example, brand managers should carefully examine  industry and brand related websites, social media channels,  and various review sites in order to ensure that they keep  on top of any potential brand backlash.  in addition to simple web browsing, there are a number  of other sophisticated tools  for tracking brand related conversation  such as google alerts, topsy, and brand watch.  the next course in this specialization we'll discuss  these tools in more detail.  second, firms should identify and track brand avoiders.  in addition to monitoring these digital cues,  firms should also identify and track consumers  who are avoiding their brand due to the presence of a dbi.  blogs and anti-branding websites are a good starting point  for locating these individuals.  once these avoiders are identified,  a firm can conduct more detailed research to determine  which specific dbi meanings are resonating most strongly  with these customers.  for example, through a series of relatively simple  and a small number of interviews we were able to determine  that coffee shop customers were avoiding starbucks mainly due  to a lack of authentic personal touch rather than due  to any problems with the quality of its products.  third, firms need to develop and test a new story  if they're faced with a dbi.  you need to be proactive.  once a dbi is identified, even in the early stages,  brand managers who seek to craft a new story  that either addresses the dbi or bypasses it entirely --  for example, when botox was first launched  in 2002 anti-brand activists created a dbi that focused  on its potential health risk, and propagating claims  that using botox could actually be fatal.  in response, botox's brand managers quickly developed a new  campaign that positioned botox not only as safe,  but also as a miracle of modern medicine.  this type of strategy must be handled very carefully  and remain true to the brand  as any inauthentic stories will be quickly detected  and exploited by anti-brand activists.  finally firms can also try to be more proactive  by vaccinating their brands from a dbi.  in essence, any dbi is a social critique  that questions the authenticity of a brand.  thus firms may be able to vaccinate their brands  from this critique by crafting their own viral marketing  campaigns and having campaigns  that display their brands in authentic manners.  a great example of this is the "will it blend" campaign  by the u.s. blender manufacturer blendtec.  in a series of viral videos, tom dickson,  the founder of blendtec, conducts a series  of fun experiments in which he attempts to blend a variety  of objects such as a baseball, a garden hose, and even an iphone  in a blendtec blender.  in addition to being fun and authentic,  these videos also provide a clear demonstration  of the blender's performance and capabilities.  i hope this brief video provides an overview of the dbi concept.  i look forward to hearing about your experience with dbis.  have you created any?  have you encountered any?  and if you're a firm, how do you react to the presence  of a doppelganger brand image?  thank you very much. 
[ music ]  >> now let's take a look at some academic insights  into this fascinating topic.  i want to talk about two studies in particular.  one study that's a bit older, one is more recent.  this first study was published in the journal  of interactive marketing in 2010.  and this is an article that i actually co-authored  with a number of other collaborators,  including utpal dholokia, who is an expert in digital marketing  at rice university, and barbara kahn at wharton,  perhaps you've seen barbara's course on coursera  on intro to marketing.  if you haven't, i encourage you to take a look.  it's a great course.  in this article, we provide a classification  that distinguishes online versus physical retailer.  and then we can examine how these differences may influence  consumer behavior.  for example, we suggest  that online retailing is typically more mobile in nature  and has a high level of accessibility,  and offers a flexible assortment of products  that can be easily customized for each individual customer.  in contrast, physical retailing is usually stationary in nature,  has limited accessibility,  and typically offers a fixed assortment of products  that most likely [inaudible] managers.  thus, this article suggests that these two types  of retailers have different attributes,  that these attributes have different influences according  to a customer's particular situation.  let me give you an example.  say its 1 o'clock in the afternoon, and you want  to buy a new t-shirt, you don't have a specific design in mind,  you just feel the need for a new t-shirt,  and you have a clothing store nearby,  you're probably more likely to visit this store  to buy this shirt than to visit an online retailer.  the second study i'd like to discuss is a more recent study.  it was published  in the marketing science institute reports in 2015.  this study is by michael sciandra and jeff inman,  they're both at the university of pittsburgh,  and they examined how the use  of smartphones affects shopping behavior in grocery stores.  it's a really interesting study.  they interviewed 2,000 grocery store shoppers across the u.s.,  both before and after they entered the physical store.  and they asked questions, such as, what do you plan  to buy before they went in, and after they come out,  the interviewers asked the shoppers what they actually  bought, and then compared the difference.  in addition, they also asked about their smartphone usage  in the store, if they use a smartphone  and what they use it for.  the results of these surveys were quite interesting.  for example, they found that only about 15 percent  of shoppers use their phones while shopping.  so if you do this, you're in the minority.  they then asked how these phones were used, and they found  that the vast majority of usage was to actually talk or text  with family or friends while shopping,  instead of using their phones for shopping-related tasks,  such as checking prices, very few people did that.  so it was used for more social than for information purposes.  however, what's most interesting is they found  that when shoppers were busy talking or texting  to their friends, they forgot to purchase a lot  of the things they planned on buying.  they found that, on average, these distracted shoppers forgot  to buy one-third of their pre-purchased planned products.  and they also engage in higher levels of impulsive buying,  buying things they didn't plan to buy ahead of time.  so the results of this study suggest  that smartphones actually distract shoppers  by taking their focus away from the shopping task,  and that this distraction is likely to reduce the purchase  of items that were planned while increasing the purchase  of unplanned items.  now that we've seen this academic research,  let's talk about some practical [phonetic] recommendations  in terms of what physical retailers can do to adapt  to this changing digital retail landscape.  first of all, my first recommendation is  to market to shoppers.  in recent years, there's been lots of increased focus  on understanding and influencing the behavior  of shoppers once they enter a physical store.  this development is called shopper marketing  and has produced a number of tools and strategies  for enhancing retail performance and enhancing the ability  of physical retailers to be more successful  in a digital environment.  for example, in the u.s., grocery stores are starting  to introduce smart shopping carts that allow customers  to keep track of the things they buy and put in their cart  by scanning their barcodes.  and also these, these new smart shopping carts can send the  customer personalized ads and promotions  as they wind their way through the, the grocery store.  another way that physical retailers can market  to customers is to make the shopping experience  more enjoyable.  for example, many shopping malls around the world are now turning  to entertainment centers, complete with amusement rides,  waterslides, and some even have ski slopes.  the second recommendation is to enhance the physical  by adding the digital.  so another way that physical retailers can meet the challenge  posed by digital tools, such as the internet,  is to employ these tools themselves.  for example, most retailers have established their own websites  and allow customers to use this channel  for both information, as well as purchase.  in addition,  some forward-looking retailers are starting  to digitize the in-store experience.  for example, in brazil the clothing retail,  c&a has high-tech hangers that display the number of likes,  just like on facebook, display the number of likes that item  of clothing has received from fellow shoppers.  third, use the power of touch.  a growing body of research suggests  that many consumers have a strong desire,  and even a strong need,  to physically touch products before they buy them.  in addition, consumers are more likely to buy a product  if they've been able to touch it ahead of time.  this may be one reason why most people prefer to shop  in physical stores rather than digital ones,  especially for products such as clothing, food, and furniture,  in which touch conveys lots of information.  the ability to touch a product before buying it is an inherent  advantage for physical retailers.  thus, these retailers should leverage this advantage  as fully as possible.  for example, the new york furniture store, coco-mat,  let's tired shoppers take a nap on its mattresses.  in addition to taking advantage of a consumers need for touch,  it's also a great way to keep customers in the store  for a longer period of time.  finally, tiny and temporary.  the days of the big bucks [phonetic] store are numbered.  they're too big and their costs are too high.  in addition, they cost a lot to shut them  down when they're not performing.  thus, rather than making such a large and risky investment,  retailers can reduce this risk and save money by setting  up a temporary pop-up store.  these are small retail stores that exist for a limited period  of time, which may be as short as even a single day.  because of their small footprint and temporary duration,  these stores have low-fixed cost,  but often generate substantial attention  and increased customer traffic.  for example, in 2011, the german clothing firm, adidas,  opened up a pop-up store in barcelona,  spain that looked like a giant shoebox.  well those are my thoughts about the new retail landscape.  i look forward to hearing your thoughts and your examples  of how you see the physical retailer adapting  to our new digital world. 
[ music ]  >> now that we have defined pay what you want,  let's take a deeper dive into this interesting concept.  i'd like to focus on three issues in particular.  first of all, do people actually pay when they don't have to?  according to standard economic thought, customers are seeking  to maximize their utility.  in other words, they want to get as much as they can  for as little, little as they have to pay.  thus, from a strictly economic perspective,  a pay what you want strategy seems quite foolish,  as rational, rational economic actors would just take a product  without paying anything for it.  however in reality, many people are not just self-interested  economic actors, but also social beings who are governed by norms  of honesty and fairness.  thus, while some do behave as economics suggest, many do not.  for example, a recent two-year study of the buying behavior  of patrons at a pay what you want restaurant in vienna,  austria, found that over 99 percent paid something  for the food they bought.  second of all, how can a firm make money  by giving its product away for free?  this is a really good question.  a firm can make money, or stay in business,  if it constantly gives away its products for free,  that doesn't make any sense.  fortunately, many people will pay something for a product even  under a pay what you want strategy.  indeed, as we will see in the radiohead case,  under a pay what you want strategy,  some people actually paid more  than the firm would attain using a typical pricing approach.  also because a pay what you want strategy is novel  and newsworthy, when a firm employs this approach,  it usually gets lots of attention.  this often results in increased traffic  and higher customer volume.  for example, in january 2015, the u.s. national aquarium  in baltimore held a pay what you want day,  in which just patrons could pay anything they wanted  for admission to the aquarium.  this event attracted over 75 hundred visitors  and it raised more than 33 thousand dollars in one day.  both of these amounts are well  above the typical level for this aquarium.  third, is this pricing strategy sustainable?  as we'll discuss shortly,  the emerging academic research suggests  that a pay what you want strategy is more likely  to succeed if it's offered for a limited duration available  to a small subset of firm's product offerings,  or limited to a certain set of buyers.  moreover, most, most of the successful examples  of pay what you want have employed this strategy  on a rather limited basis.  for example, radiohead used this strategy for the release of one  of its albums, but employed a more traditional pricing  approach for its next album release.  thus, pay what you want appears to be an approach  that is a good change of pace, but not sustainable  as a long-term pricing strategy.  now let's take a look at some of the research  about this fascinating topic.  research on pay what you want is still quite new and emerging,  so there's a lot that we don't know  yet about this new pricing strategy.  however, a number of key insights are starting to emerge.  i want to discuss two studies in particular.  the first study was published in 2009 in the journal  of marketing, this study was conducted by a group of scholars  in germany and was the very first academic study  about pay what you want pricing.  in addition to introducing this concept  and explaining how it works, this article contained a series  of field experiments in which the researchers convinced three  different businesses, two restaurants,  and one movie theater, to employ a pay,  pay what you want strategy for a period of time.  they then studied the behavior of over 600 customers  across these three businesses.  the results they found were quite interesting.  first of all, they found  that every single person paid something.  none of the customers were asked  to be given the product for free.  on average, the prices paid were about 15 percent lower  than the prices typically charged by these firms.  however, the average volume  of sales during the pay what you want period was  about 10 percent higher.  thus price went down, but quantity went up.  in total, the pay what you want strategy resulted in higher  than average revenues, for both restaurants,  but lower than average revenues for the movie theater.  this article provides early evidence  that a pay what you want pricing strategy,  it'd actually be profitable under certain conditions.  the second study is more recent, published in 2013,  in a journal called marketing letters,  and this more recent study, another group  of german scholars examined how customers respond  to pay what you want over time.  these scholars conducted a field experiment,  in which they examined the payment behavior of a group  of students who patronize a coffee bar in germany.  for the purpose of this study, this coffee bar added ice coffee  to its menu, and priced it using a pay what you want strategy.  the researchers then used loyalty cards  to track the payment patterns of these patrons  over an eight-week time period.  the results were very interesting.  in particular, they found that, on average,  the price paid declined over time.  the average price for their first purchase was 80 cents,  went down to 66 cents for the second purchase,  and 57 cents for the third.  so this article suggests  that pay what you want pricing is more likely to be profitable  for first-time customers rather than repeat customers.  it also suggests that this strategy may be better suited  as a special pricing promotion rather  than a permanent strategic approach.  this brings us to our recommendations.  i have four in particular.  first of all, set a reference price.  as we discussed earlier, most customers have a reference price  in mind when evaluating a potential purchase.  this reference price effect can also be employed  in a pay what you want pricing scheme.  one way of doing this would be clearly display the price  of a comparable item.  for example, if a firm offers pay what you want for vitamin c,  it could announce this next to its price  for vitamin d. most people want to think  of themselves as fair and honest.  thus setting a reference price should decrease their temptation  to pay little, or nothing for a product as offered  as a pay what you want strategy.  second, focus on marginal cost.  although customers will likely pay something,  even when they can name their own price,  this is a risky strategy.  thus pay what you want is best employed for products,  they have low marginal costs,  thus this strategy is especially attractive for digital goods,  such as music, text, and video.  for these types of products,  each additional unit has a very low marginal cost.  a firm can take this one step further  by pairing a digital pay what you want product  with a physical good that has a high list price.  for example, as part of its pay what you want strategy,  radiohead also offered customers the opportunity  to buy a limited edition box set of its music for 82 dollars.  it sold 100,000 of these disc boxes for a total  of 8 million dollars in revenue, in addition to what it received  for its pay what you want strategy for its album.  third, try a limited rollout.  as discussed earlier,  most successful pay what you want strategies are applied  to a limited range of a firm's product offerings,  or for a limited duration of time.  for example, headsets.com employs pay what you want  for only two of its many hundred headsets that it sells.  in addition, this pricing strategy is only available  to its returning customers.  this type of limited rollout reduces the risk  of a pay what you want strategy while maintaining its  attention-getting benefits.  fourth, use charity appeals.  both academic research and practical experience indicates  that a pay what you want strategy is more likely  to be successful if the seller announces that some,  or all of its proceeds, will be given to charity.  this sends a signal that the seller is generous, which,  in turn, should encourage customers to exhibit generosity  and thus be more likely to pay a higher price.  as noted earlier, humble bundle employs this strategy as a means  of encouraging higher payment levels from its customers.  those are my thoughts about pay what you want.  i'd like to see and hear your thoughts,  especially if you have any local examples of firms that are,  are employing this strategy where you shop and live. 
>> now let's take a look at some  of the academic research on this topic.  surprisingly, academic research  on price comparison tools is rather sparse so there's a lot  that we don't know about this technology.  however, a few key insights are starting to emerge.  i'd like to discuss two particular studies,  one that was conducted a while ago and a more recent one.  the first study is one of my favorites, it's by john lynch  and dan ariely and dan, as you may know,  also teaches a course --  a popular course on behavioral economics on [inaudible].  if you haven't taken the course yet, i encourage you to do that.  this article was published in marketing science and is one  of the first academic studies to examine price comparison tools.  in this study, the researchers designed an experimental  shopping website that contained different types of wine sold  from two fictitious online retailers.  each of these two retailers sold 60 different wines,  40 of these wines were unique to each retailer and 20 were common  across both of them, so that some that were the same  and some that were different.  the website contained information  about both the price, as well as the quality of each  of these different wines.  the participants in the study were then asked  to use their own money  to purchase the wine that they selected.  they could buy as many or as few as they wanted.  the researchers then examined which wines were purchased  and how much they cost.  the results of the study revealed  that by enabling participants to make price comparisons,  this increase their price sensitivity when shopping  for wines that were common across retailers but not  for wines that were unique to a specific retailer.  thus this article provides evidence  that price comparison tools lead customers to focus more  on price instead of other product features  when evaluating their product sold across multiple retailers.  the second study is more recent, it was published  by serenko & hayes in 2010 in the international journal  of electronic business.  in this more recent study, these two schools  from lake head university  in canada examined the actual performance  of 16 different price comparison tools, including deal time,  pricegrabber, and yahoo shopping.  for each of these sites, they examined their prices for a set  of randomly selected books, cds and dvds.  based on their results, these researchers conclude  that although these tools could help result in price savings,  each of them contained lots of different errors in terms  of both prices and also product information.  they concluded that customers interested  in saving money should use these tools but none  of them are ideal, thus they recommend  that customers should employ more than one comparison tool  when engaged in a price search.  now this brings us to practical recommendations,  i'd like to make some recommendations for firms  who are dealing with this new environment  of price comparison apps.  first of all, one way of dealing with this new digital world is  to make comparisons difficult.  as shown in the study by lynch ariely,  price comparison tools appear  to make customers focus more strongly on a product's price;  this results in lost sales for firms that may not be able  to offer the lowest price, thus one way around this dilemma is  to offer products that cannot be easily compared.  for example, many retailers offer private label products  that are difficult to compare  because other retailers don't carry the same  identical product.  a second strategy is to match competitor's prices.  if a firm is unable to offer a unique product,  another option is to enact a policy  of matching competitor's prices.  in the u.s., for example, many firms such as walmart,  target and best buy, have these price matching policies,  although this type of policy is likely to result  in lower revenue per product,  it should help reduce the growing trend  of what's called customer showrooming,  in which customers physically examine a product  in a physical store, then buy it online at a lower price.  a third strategy, if you can't beat them, join them.  many price comparison tools provide information not only  about online retailers but also physical ones.  for example, red laser list prices  for nearby physical retailers and also has a mapping function  that shows shoppers how to actually get to these stores.  given the lack of shipping costs and the benefits  of immediate acquisition, many customers may choose  to visit a physical store rather than buying a product online,  thus it may make sense for even small local retailers  to have their products listed and price comparison tools  such as google shopping.  fourth and finally, be unique.  as noted by the famous strategy scholar, michael porter,  the best way to fight against price competition is  to offer something unique.  there are several great examples of retailers  that sell rather generic products that have  such a unique shopping experience  that price has little impact  on the customer decision making process.  the iconic apple store in new york city is a great example  but there are many others such as wall drug store  in south dakota, the carusel bookstore  in bucharest, or the dubai mall.  all of these unique retailers offer an experience that is hard  to duplicate by others and thus makes price comparisons  largely irrelevant.  a more radical approach would be  to eliminate fixed prices altogether  and let customers choose their own price.  this is the next digital concept  that we'll discuss in this module.  well, those are my thoughts about price comparison tools.  i'd like to hear your thoughts  and also the examples that you have.  which tools do you use and have they saved you any money? 
[ music ]  >> [background music] the first study was published  in the journal of interactive marketing in 2009.  this particular study was conducted by two scholars  at new york university.  so, it takes a look at how ugc affects the sale of music,  thus the purpose of this study was to determine the degree  to which ugc actually benefits the product that is the focus  of these user contributions.  this research tracked the sales of 108 different music albums  that were released in the u.s. they then assessed a variety  of ugc measures such as average album ratings  across various music related websites as well as a number  of user contributions on music blogs.  the results of this study reveal that both of these two types  of ugc have a positive association  with album sale one week before its released.  thus, this research provides some evidence  that ugc does improve the sales of a product.  the second study that i would  like to discuss was also published in the journal  of interactive marketing.  this was published more recently in 2012.  in this study, three scholars from york university,  so the first study was new york university.  this is york university in canada.  these scholars examined ugc  across three different social media sites.  twitter, facebook, and youtube.  the goal of this study was to determine  if brands were portrayed differently  across these three different types of social media.  to do this, they examined ugc  for two different clothing brands.  these were actual accompanies.  the first is called a company called lulu lemon,  and the second was american apparel.  they picked these two brands because they are  in the same industry but different in terms  of their social media activity.  lulu lemon is very active  in social media while american apparel is not.  they then randomly selected 100 different user contributions  for each of these two companies  across those three different social media sites.  so, they picked 100 twitter contributions,  100 facebook contributions,  and 100 youtube contributions for both brands.  they then conducted what is known as a content analysis  to determine if these contributions were positive,  negative, or neutral.  in essence, what this entails is having their research assistants  look at the content for each of these contributions  and then code them into one of these three categories.  across both of these two brands,  about half the contributions were positive while only  about 10% were negative.  also, the contributions for lulu lemon were much more positive  and less negative than those for american apparel.  interestingly, the degree of positive contributions  on both facebook and youtube were  about the same for both brands.  however, twitter was much different.  while 64% of twitter contributions  for lulu lemon were positive,  only 22% of american apparel's twitter contributions  were positive.  so, that's a factor of three times more positive  for lulu lemon that for american apparel.  so, this article reveals that most ugc  on social media are much more likely  to be positive than negative.  it also suggests that firms that are more active  on twitter are more likely  to obtain much more positive contributions.  well, now that we have taken a look at this academic research,  let's now turn to some practical recommendations.  if you're a company, what can you do  to enhance user-generated content?  well, first of all, it may sound simple, but just ask to share.  as noted earlier, about one  out of every three internet users has made at least one ugc.  there are now about three billion internet users  around the world, thus there are about one billion people  who have shown a willingness to contribute their time,  energy and ideas on behalf of a brand.  the trick is, however, to direct their efforts towards your brand  rather than your competitors.  as noted in the study by smith and colleagues  that we just discussed, consumers are more likely  to provide favorable contributions to firms  that are active in social media  and encourage their participation.  surprisingly, although most large firms have a facebook page  and a twitter account,  few of them actually encourage the customers to contribute.  so, for most first, social media is a one-way communication flow  instead of a two-way conversation.  that should be the ideal.  a good way to get this conversation started is  to simply ask customers to share their ideas with you.  second, be responsive.  after a first asks its customers to give them ideas,  and if it's lucky enough to receive these contributions,  it needs to close the loop by being responsive.  for example, dell computer has a team of individuals  that are just devoted solely to monitoring its discussion boards  and responding to consumer postings.  so, first choose to be responsive  through financial rewards.  for example, the fast food restaurant taco bell,  sends gift cards to active social media users  who make positive contributions to their brand.  by being responsive to user contributions,  firms are more likely to obtain higher levels  of ugc in the future.  third, remember the pareto principle.  if you've had an economics class,  you may remember this principle.  the pareto principle comes from the italian economist,  vilfredo pareto who found way back in 1896 that 80%  of the land in italy was owned by only 20% of the population.  since this time, this principle has become generalized  to be known as the 80/20 rule, and it has been found to apply  to a large number of phenomenon.  for example, 80% of the world's income is owned  by 20% of its population.  this principle is also exhibited in ugc where approximately 90%  of all the content is created by only 10% of its contributors.  thus, not all contributors are equal.  some are more influential than others.  firms should keep this principle in mind and seek  to identify these influential contributors  and reward them for their efforts.  fourth and finally, integrate ugc with traditional promotions.  thus far we have largely discussed ugc as an alternative  to traditional promotions such as television advertising.  indeed, these two forms of promotions are quite different  and often conducted as separate activities.  however, firms should consider trying to link these two forms  of promotion together.  for example, target has highlighted  in its educational initiatives  by creating a television advertising campaign  that features videos from its customers.  these videos capture the moment in which their sons  and daughters open up their college admission letters.  so, it's very emotional and lots of happy moments.  this advertising campaign was voted as one of the best ads  of the year and has resulted in substantial attention  and goodwill for this brand.  well, those are my thoughts on ugc.  i'd like to hear your thoughts and also your contributions.  please post them on our discussion board.  i look forward to seeing what you come up with. 
[ music ]  >> hi. my name is vishal sachdev.  i am a faculty at the college of business here and also director  of the illinois makerlab.  so today we're going to talk about the process for going  from a download on thingiverse to a print on a printer.  in some of the other videos you have probably already seen dr.  aric rindfleisch explaining to you, you know, the activity  that you're doing on thingiverse.  but right now we're going to actually demonstrate the process  from a download to a print  and actually also show you how the print builds up.  and we're going to use the same rhino model  that you've been used to in the videos that you've seen already.  you will see more of me in some of the other modules as well.  and i will also be with you  for the capstone course, as i'm leading that.  so i look forward to working with all of you  over this specialization.  so first of all we have starting out with pulling  up the rhino 3d scan on thingiverse  and you already, you know, seen that.  but if you haven't just do a search for the rhino  and you'll see a screenshot  as well showing you how the process is actually working  as i'm doing it on my computer.  so on thingiverse once you locate the file we're just doing  a download off the sdl file, which is the format  that allows any 3d model to be prepared  for printing on most 3d printers.  so the dot sdl file format is what you're looking  for when you're preparing files for pretty much, you know,  many of the printers will accept that format.  so once you download that into-- onto your computer and,  of course, at the makerlab we are working  with the makerbot replicator two printers  so we are using the software  that makerbot provides that's called makerbot desktop.  and i have that open on the screen right now.  so once you open that, you know, that software  up all you're doing is pulling the download into the--  into the software and sometimes the scale is a bit of an issue  so there are easy to use menu options in the software itself  where you can set your scale to, you know, whatever size you need  so it maintains the ratio.  you don't have a problem in worrying about is it going  to get stretched or distorted as long as it maintains the ratio?  your model will be fine.  you can, you know, twist and turn the model  to make sure it's, you know, it's aligned properly.  you can lay it flat on the base that it's going to build on.  and also you can adjust.  and of course if you want to have a better look  at the model you can look around and make sure that it's,  sort of, flat on the platform.  now when you have a model like the rhino that we're using,  which has a little bit of an overhang, you have to make sure  that when the printer prints it it's printing some supports  with it.  so before you start printing it one of the things  that you adjust on the software is under the print setting menu  and there is something called the draft, which as you see  when the print actually starts it builds a layer below the  object that you're printing.  and supports are useful when you have some model  which has overhang so if it's at an angle that cannot build  up on it builds some supports.  and you're not really doing  that you're just saying hey software build me some supports  and the software takes care of that.  we are going to stick with the standard resolution.  we don't need to worry about a very fine print on this.  if you do a finer,  higher resolution the print takes longer and, you know,  sometimes that will add to the cost as well depending  on where you're printing it.  the other settings at the bottom  in the what's called the makerbot slicer.  infill is essentially how much material you're filling in.  so if you're saying a 10% infill 90% of the space inside  that model is just empty space  and it builds a honeycomb structure.  again you'll see that when the model prints.  the number of shells tells you how many, sort of,  layers in the outer wall that the printer is going to make.  so default is two shells.  and again the layer height is when the printer is moving up  and printing the model, what is the minimum thickness  for each layer.  so here it is point two mm or a fifth of a millimeter  and that's the standard resolution that we print at.  it can go up to an accuracy of 1/10 of a millimeter  but we recommend staying with point two.  we've done our settings.  we've used the raft and the supports in our model  and now what we're doing is sending that file into a format  that the printer can print.  so it's called slicing, which effectively is, you know,  converting that 3d model into a set of x, y and z coordinates  that the printer will, sort of, follow as a path  and keep making layer by layer.  once you're doing that it also gives you an estimate  of the amount of material and the amount  of time it'll take, you know.  so this is based on the kind of printer you're using.  so for example for this print it's saying it's  about 51 minutes, 11.85 grams  and the other settings that we have set.  rafts are on.  supports are on and we're using a resolution of point two mm.  so when i say export now it's asked me to save it somewhere.  so you can, you know-- i don't have the computer connected  to the printer or you can put it on a, you know, on a sd card  or you know some printers take usb drives.  different printers allow different options.  but for these printers we are using sd cards so i'm just going  to save that file on the sd card and then we can move  over to the printer and see how the printer, you know,  starts the process and the build actually happens.  it takes about, depending on the model itself,  it takes about a minute or two to process the file.  if it's a complex model it'll take more time.  so it's, sort of, creating the, you know, the file.  it's verifying it to make sure that, you know,  it's removing any errors that are occurring  and finally it saves it  in a format called the dot x 3g format,  which is what the printer understands when it needs to,  you know, move its extruder on the x, y and z axis.  okay so we have the file now ready on the sd card  and i'm going to move that out of my computer  and then we are now going to reset up on the printer  and see how the print actually happens.  [ music ] 
[ music ]  >> hi, welcome to our first module.  this is the first portion of the marketing mix,  our first p, which is product.  i'll be taking a walk to our campus' main quad,  along with my student assistant jolie.  we're going there to talk with some of our students,  these members of the internet generation, digital natives,  asking them how they use digital tools, such as the laptop,  the smart phone and the internet to engage  with the product portion of the marketing mix.  we'll ask them questions such as do you use these tools  to help firms co-create products and brands?  take a close look at their answers;  i think you'll be fascinated by their responses.  >> have you ever offered any product ideas to a company?  >> no, i haven't.  >> is there any reason why you haven't done that?  >> just haven't had any product ideas i guess,  i don't really think about it that often.  i feel like i should but i don't.  >> and do you read product reviews before you  purchase something?  >> yes, yeah.  my dad trained me well so i do.  >> so how many do you usually read before you feel  like you have an informed decision?  >> i usually try to read like --  i try to get an even number of like bad reviews  and good reviews just so i can weigh out the pros and cons,  see if the bad reviews are really worth considering.  >> right.  >> or if they're not.  >> so have you guys ever offered any product ideas  to any companies through online mediums?  >> oh, like give suggestions [inaudible].  >> i've never done that.  >> i don't think [inaudible].  >> or don't like a product.  you guys read reviews [inaudible].  have you ever written a review for a product that you've used?  >> i've written reviews at like restaurants i've been to.  >> i've never written.  i read them all the time though,  just to get like basic [inaudible].  >> [inaudible] is definitely --  >> have you offered any product suggestions to companies?  this could be like product reviews,  product feedback, anything like that.  >> not really, unless i'm really unsatisfied with the product.  i know it's kind of bad to say but if i really  like the product, i don't really take the time to say that.  i do, even though i really rely  on those opinions of other people.  >> any product suggestions to any companies  or like given product review?  >> no.  >> so have you ever offered any product ideas to a company?  >> no, i should but no.  >> so you read reviews but you don't write reviews.  >> no. i really should though,  'cause some things are either really good or really bad.  >> so is there any reason why?  it seems like a lot of college students don't write reviews  so who's writing all these reviews?  >> i don't know.  >> have you ever offered any product suggestions to a company  or written a product review or anything like that?  >> maybe. i know i've written a product review,  i can't remember what it was for but i never do it if i'm happy  with the product, i only do it if i'm totally pissed by it, so. 
[ music ]  >> hello. welcome to our third module--  this third portion of the marketing mix,  the third p, which is placement.  as before, jolie [phonetic]  and i will kick off this segment going to our quad and talking  to our digital natives about their use of digital tools  such as the smart phone, the internet,  and the laptop computer-- asking them how they use these tools  to engage in purchasing-- buying things online.  take a look at what tools they use.  are they buying using their smart phones, their laptops,  or are they choosing to actually visit physical retailers?  >> so, best buy or bestbuy.com?  i know you said bestbuy.com earlier.  >> yeah, i do both.  but probably bestbuy.com a little bit more.  >> and why?  why the online?  >> it's just easier--  >> got it.  >> -- you don't have to do drive all the way  over there and check things out.  >> sure.  >> yeah, i think that too.  sometimes it's out of stock, so you can just wait.  just stay at home and buy it there.  >> most of my electronics--  usually my dad does most of the shopping  because he's really into electronics--  >> got it.  >> -- so--  >> do you know if he purchases them online or in person?  >> he likes to do online shopping.  i think it's just because he's lazy--  [ laughter ]  -- to actually go to the store.  >> right.  >> best buy or bestbuy.com?  >> bestbuy.com.  i don't really have time to go into the store and do stuff,  like, you know, whereas online i can just be  on the go using my phone, so if--  i don't usually go on bestbuy.com either,  but if i were to pick between the two--  >> i would choose the store.  >> -- i would choose bestbuy.com.  >> i would choose best buy.  because, i mean, i've never gone on bestbuy.com, and i've been  in the store, so i would choose best buy.  >> got it.  >> best buy.  >> why? why is that?  >> i don't really shop for electronics that often,  but i like to have that face to face contact  with someone rather than--  especially since i'm not really into electronics.  i'd rather have someone professional  that knows the things more to talk to and ask questions rather  than other people's opinions online.  >> actually, i have used bestbuy.com for reviews  on the laptop, but then we went to the store and purchased it.  >> best buy.  >> and why is that?  >> i like to actually see the things and talk with someone  in person than having to go through online.  because i feel like when you go to best buy,  you're buying something that's more expensive,  so i want to know in person.  >> sure.  >> yeah.  [ silence ] 
[ music ]  >> hello, welcome to our fourth module; this final part  of the marketing mix, the last of the four p's which is price.  in this module we'll kick off as before by heading  to the quad talking to some young students,  again some members of the internet generation  about how they use digital tools such as the smartphone,  the laptop, and the internet to engage in price search  when searching for new products to buy.  take a close look at their responses;  i think you'll find them to be quite interesting.  >> all that i do on my laptop mostly, yeah.  >> okay and how often do you do that maybe per week?  >> more often than i wish.  fairly often, two times week.  >> got it, and which function do you think you do more,  like shopping or checking prices or...  >> mostly actual shopping, yeah.  >> and how often do you use your devices for shopping purposes  such as buying things, checking prices,  reading customer reviews?  >> i'd say less than twice a month,  probably once or twice a month.  >> and which functions do you use?  >> checking for prices as well as buying them online.  >> okay and what-- do you use websites or apps to do this?  >> i use mostly you know i check amazon and then a couple  of websites that compare prices from other apps or other sites.  >> what are the names of these websites?  >> wistero; it's a site that collects data from a bunch  of shopping websites and compares the best price.  >> are there specific websites that you guys use or apps?  >> not specific apps, but like just i know like most stores  that i shop at have their own apps.  to be honest like i think everyone really has apps  nowadays for companies and businesses, so.  >> yeah, i mean i'll occasionally use like amazon,  [inaudible] for like getting school stuff; it's like cheaper  that way than going to like, i don't know...  >> it's just faster, sure.  so can you guys give us a recent example?  >> like buying text books and stuff really,  because amazon has them for a lot cheaper.  i went to a bookstore and there would be like ten--  like a couple hundred dollars before.  >> so do you use these devices for online shopping purposes  such as price checks, reading reviews, anything like that?  >> yeah. especially the smartphone if you're  on the go you use it when you're going to like--  checking out their prices.  i use my laptop more for online shopping  because it's more convenient, and it's easier  to navigate through the websites.  >> sure.  >> how frequently do you think you do that?  >> online shopping maybe like once a week just to check  out the deals, and i feel like there's better deals online.  >> do you use any of those devices for shopping purposes  such as product reviews, shopping online,  price checks; anything like that?  >> yeah, i mostly use my laptop for that.  a lot of the shopping websites don't really work that well  on a tablet i found or smartphones.  >> okay, i got it.  and how frequently would you say you do that, you know browsing  or checking prices, things like that?  >> usually when i need something i make it pretty quick.  i go online and find the best price and then buy it.  >> do you have a recent example?  >> a recent example, yeah, i needed some winter shoes  so i just yesterday went to zappos, amazon,  and a bunch of other websites and found what i was looking for  and then go with the best price and bought them.  >> and what did you end up using for a shopping platform?  >> i ended up buying the shoes on zappos. 
[ music ]  >> hello. welcome to our second module.  this is the promotion portion of the marketing mix, our second p.  as before, we'll kick off with a "views from the quad" segment,  which [inaudible] will talk with students  about the use of digital tools.  take a close at the degree to which students use these tools,  again, the laptop, the smart phone; the internet,  to engage with the promotion portion of the marketing mix.  for example, do they use product reviews to make decisions  about what products to buy?  also, whose reviews are they using?  who are providing these reviews?  i think you'll find their response will be  quite interesting.  >> are there specific websites that you guys use, or apps?  >> not specific apps, but like, just--  i know like, most stores that i shop  at have their own apps, to be honest.  like, i think everyone, really, has apps nowadays,  for companies and businesses, so--  >> yeah. i mean, i'll occasionally use, like, amazon--  the amazon app-- for, like, getting school stuff.  >> mm-hmm.  >> like, cheaper than, like, going to like, i don't know--  >> it's just faster.  >> -- a big-box store.  >> sure. are there any specific websites or apps other  than amazon that you use?  >> um-- amazon, and just, like, specific websites of stores,  like, forever 21, or like,  banana republic, or things like that.  stores, specifically, like, clothing stores.  >> facebook or twitter?  >> neither.  >> really?  >> i don't use either, so--  >> so, how do you stay in touch with your friends, then?  >> um, i guess the old fashioned way through, like,  text and snapchat [phonetic].  i like that.  i use instagram, but i don't use the other stuff.  >> okay, so for those of you over 40,  texting is old fashioned.  [ laughter ]  [ silence ] 
[ music ]  >> hello. as you know, this course is title,  "marketing in a digital world".  much of our focus will be on the later portion  of this title, the digital part.  thus, i wanted to provide some attention  to the earlier portion, the marketing part,  by discussing what marketing is  and how it influences the structure of our course.  now, i've been teaching for nearly 20 years, and i've found  that the term "marketing" means different things  to different people.  for example, some people think of marketing as advertising.  other think of it as sales.  and many have a negative perception of marketing  as a form of manipulation.  indeed, most portrayals of marketing executives in movies  and television are rather quite unflattering.  thus, i'm interested in learning what marketing means to you.  please take a look at the options on the screen  and respond to those that you feel best capture the essence  of marketing.  we'll examine your responses and discuss them a bit later.  in order to gain a better understanding  of what marketing is all about, we visited with some  of our esteemed marketing faculty here at the university  of illinois and asked them a simple question:  what is marketing?  here is what they said:  >> well, marketing to me is all the things that firms do to try  to create value for consumers in the marketplace  in an increasingly crowded marketplace.  so that has to do with all the points of contact  that a consumer might have with a firm.  for example, in the marketplace, what kinds of products they see,  how those things are packaged, how they're-- how they present.  so, yeah, it's got to do with a physical component,  but it also has to do with the essence of the brands  that consumers see in the marketplace, and all the work  that goes into telling a story about what this brand is  and why this brand is different from other brands  in a way that's meaningful, and value, and distinct,  and makes you want to choose not just any product,  but that specific product.  and that has to do with thinking really strategically  about where your product fits in the marketplace  versus the competition,  what kinds of unique needs might it fill, what's the personality  of the brand, what kinds of people might it attract,  and then where can they get it, and how can they-- how can it--  they make sure that they've got the right thing  in the right place.  so it's about all that we do to create that value.  it's about all that we do to make sure that, again,  people choose just any products,  but the products that we're selling.  >> when i think of the definition of marketing,  i think of how products and services in the--  especially experiences-- add value to customers' lives and--  because i study consumer behavior.  a lot of that value means social value, value in terms  of enjoyment and pleasure, and also value in terms  of helping them live a more enjoyable and productive life.  so, also value can mean, however,  how marketing adds value to a firm.  so, if you think about-- what is--  what are coca-cola's most important assets as a firm,  their most important assets are brands that then translate  into revenues and stockholder value.  so that's what i think of when i think of marketing.  >> marketing is about developing customer relationships.  developing long-term relationships with consumers  through providing them with goods or services  that are tailored to their needs.  that's what marketing is.  >> as you can see from these brief interviews, there are lots  of different views about what marketing is.  however, there are also some points in common.  we'll explore these commonalities in just a moment.  before i do that, i would  like to show you the official definition of marketing.  according the american marketing association,  marketing is the activity, set of institutions, and processes  for creating, communicating, delivering;  exchange of offerings that have value for customers, clients,  partners, and society at large.  so, in essence, marketing is the enactment  of a mutually beneficial exchange between two parties:  a seller, and a buyer.  we usually think of the seller as a firm  and the buyer as a consumer.  however, there are also other types of exchanges such as b  to b [phonetic] transactions between two firms.  typically, the seller is offering a product.  however, a seller could also offer a variety of other things  such as a service, an idea, or even an experience.  likewise, we usually think of the buyer as providing money  to acquire this offering.  however buyers also offer other scarce resources  such as their attention, their time, and their energy.  all of this sounds quite wonderful.  buyers give sellers money in exchange for valuable objects.  however, there's more to the story.  two key points are missing.  first, customers may not fully know what they really want,  and are often uncertain about the degree  to which any particular product may meet their needs.  second, there are typically many firms offering  competing products.  these two factors, consumer uncertainty  and competitive offerings makes the marketing process quite  difficult for both firms and consumers.  for example, the average u.s. supermarket offers  over 100 different types of shampoos.  it would take hours to learn about all of their ingredients,  potential benefits, and appropriateness for your hair.  in order to overcome these challenges,  marketers have developed a number  of useful tools and techniques.  one of the most useful tools in the marketer's toolkit--  is something called the four p's, which are inside  or marketer's toolkit.  the concept of the four p's was introduced in 1960  by professor jerome mccarthy at michigan state university.  thus, this concept has stood the test of time.  indeed, although the marketing faculty  that we interviewed offered somewhat different views  about the definition of marketing,  all of them clearly identified the four p's.  >> so, as a person who studies issues related to branding  and brand management, the marketing mix-- the four p's--  they're really all important, because you know,  what the consumer sees or experiences  in the marketplace is really the confluence of a bunch  of decisions that got made about what product to sell,  at what price, and through what distribution channels,  and more importantly, i think with what messaging strategy?  because all of these decisions combine to this bundle  of attributes that we consider to be the essence of the brand.  and that's really what, at the end of the day,  consumers are going to use.  you know, what they know about the brand, how they feel  about the brand, that's how they're going  to make those decisions about whether  or not a brand is meaningful distinct in a way that's going  to make them choose that brand as opposed  to other similar brands in the marketplace.  so, each one of the marketing mix elements is critical.  making decisions about those things is critical,  but it is absolutely the bundle of those attributes.  it's how they come together-- it's the recipe.  they've each got those elements in the recipe, but it's how,  you know, the extent to which one or the other is emphasized  that can really make all the difference  in how consumers choose  and whether they choose your products.  >> when we talk about marketing, a lot of times,  we start with this framework about the four p's: product,  place, promotion; price.  all of these are extremely important and all  of them can add value  to consumers' lives and also to the firm.  i think, probably, the most interesting p  to me right now is probably place, because it is the one  that i think has experienced the biggest change.  we have e-tailing [phonetic] versus retailing.  we have customer co-creation in terms  of creating their own additions  or customizing goods in the marketplace.  products, i think, one has to be careful to think  of not just products as tangible goods,  so i think about products, services,  experiences, and ideas.  ideas also have to be marketed.  you have to convince a culture, for example, to buy into, say,  an interstate system, or to buy into even faxing,  which is now is an old technology.  or say, google glass.  that's an idea as well as a product.  so, that's kind of interesting.  price is always one, of course,  that consumers care greatly about,  and it's also probably more interesting  than people might think in terms of, you know,  what is the price of this product?  because it actually captures a lot of the macro forces  that happen in a culture.  whether, for example, one that we often think about, say,  the price of gas is tied very much  to how much consumers are supposed to travel  in the upcoming period, or how much other things cost,  and maybe they don't have the money to pay for gas.  so, gas is-- gas is a great product  where you see price fluctuating  and you can really see the marketplace factors.  finally, we come to promotion,  which i think is also equally interesting.  it has also changed dramatically from individual messages  in our email boxes to the spectaculars,  what we call the giant, sort of, neon lit billboards  in times square, and also couponing, sampling, you know,  you can now go to the grocery store and wave your app in front  of the cashier and actually just save money  that way a lot of times.  so, i think that's a really interesting one.  so this is one of the reasons i think marketing is so exciting  as a field, because it captures such a wide range of activities  that have to be strategically managed and coordinated.  >> over the past 60 years,  by strategically employing these four p's,  marketers around the world have been able  to effectively facilitate valuable exchanges  with their customers.  recently, the digital revolution has provided marketers  and customers with a new set of tools, such as the internet,  the smart phone, and the 3-d printer.  and the remainder of this course will examine how these new tools  are fundamentally altering these four components  of the marketing mix. 
[ music ]  >> ok. let's talk about some academic insights.  the research on customer co-creation is quite new  and still emerging.  so, there's a lot that we don't know  yet about this new innovation technique; however,  a number of key insights are starting to emerge.  i'd like to discuss two different studies,  one that's a bit older that was conducted about a decade ago  and a more recent one.  so, the first study and this is one of my favorite studies  in this domain is by franke and piller.  it was published in the journal  of product innovation management in 2004.  in this study, the researchers conducted a series  of experiments in which they asked participants  to design their own watches.  so, they had toolkits in which these participants could create  their own workable watches.  that's pretty neat and what they found was that the participants  who made their own watches were willing to pay more  for these watches compared to participants in other condition  who were given a professionally designed watch.  and they also found when other set  of participants were given both sets of designs,  they actually preferred the co-created watches  and were willing to pay more for them.  so, the results of this study suggest that users are able  to create attractive designs and, in addition,  they'll pay more for the ability to do so.  that's pretty neat.  the second study that i'd like to talk  about is a more recent study.  it came out in 2015 by he and yan  in a journal called the computer journal.  in this more recent study,  the researchers actually conducted a blog mining study  to examine how social media is used to engage customers  in the co-creation process and this study revealed  that most co-creation activities are focused on the early stages  of the product development process.  most are focused on idea generation rather  than further concept development or product launch.  that's interesting.  they also found that the very most successful firms are open  and transparent about how they intend  to use these contributions provided by their customers.  so, this suggests that in order to be successful in terms  of employing co-creation, firms need to release some control  and be less secretive  about their product development activities.  that's an interesting insight as well.  now, given that we've talked about these academic insights  and my own research on customer co-creation,  let's talk about some practical recommendations.  if you're a firm trying to engage in this new form  of innovation, what should you do?  first of all, we have something called the rule of one.  now, typically we see across most co-creation platforms,  only about 1% of all submissions are useful  and can be implemented.  this is a very low percentage, so what this means in order  for co-creation to work, you need lots of ideas and need  to provide incentives for many customers to contribute.  and that's a problem for many platforms.  second of all, we find  that authenticity is especially critical.  customers are much more likely  to contribute their valuable time and energy to firms  that have an authentic need for their help,  rather than just trying  to exploit them for commercial gain.  for example, linux and other types  of open source software have a great deal of authenticity  because their very existence depends  on the customer co-creation process.  that's how they exist.  we'll talk more  about authenticity later on in this course.  third, something i call patches and badges.  you know, we all like to be rewarded for our efforts.  we want to feel that our efforts matter.  so, customers who engage  in co-creation are no exception to this policy.  most successful co-creation efforts award successful  co-creators by not just financial rewards,  but also through some visible symbol of recognition.  so, for example, nasa, which employs customer co-creation  for its space program, rewards successful co-creators  by giving them a special patch they can display  on their clothing.  in fact, nasa found that this patch was a much stronger  motivator than financial rewards.  and finally, don't be the bad guy.  as noted earlier, one of the dangers  of customer co-creation is the possibility  of alienating customers who-- by rejection their contributions.  one way to reduce this risk is to engage your broader community  to help evaluate and vote on these contributions.  so, for example, dell sources customer co-creations  on its website platform called ideastorm in which  to improve its products and its offerings.  so, in this website,  dell actually engages its customer community to evaluate  and vote on these ideas, thus dell's customers  who have their ideas rejected feel it's other customers  who don't like their ideas rather than dell itself.  this overview provided the foundations  of customer co-creations, the essentials,  what you need to know.  if you'd like to take a deeper dive,  please check the many links on our course website.  in particular, i'd like to focus or draw your attention  to two particular books.  first of all, collaboration and co-creation by my friend  and colleague gaurav bhalla.  this is a great book full of lots of practitioner examples  of how firms used co-creation  to enhance their business processes.  if you're looking for something a bit more academic in nature,  i'd like to recommend this book, collaborating with customers  to innovate by two professors,  one from northwestern university.  and this book provides more of an academic insight in terms  of the foundations and the concepts involved  in co-creation.  i'd also like to hear your thoughts.  if you're a firm, how can you engage in customer co-creation  to enhance your innovation activities?  if you're a consumer, do you do any of these things?  do you give firms ideas?  if so, how?  and our discussion format--  our discussion forum on our course webpage,  you can provide your ideas.  i look forward to reading them.  thank you. 
3d hubs is the world's largest network of 3d printers.  it's like airbnb for 3d printing,  connecting printer owners with people who'd like to print.  if you don't have a 3d printer, you can easily find one near you and  print your design.  we currently have over 14,000 printers registered in 147 countries.  we want to enable students to use this awesome technology, and  to produce their own objects locally,  this is why we're giving a 30% discount to all students of the course to try 3d hubs.  let's see how it works.  you click on this 3d print button.  here you can add the file that you'd like to print.  once it's uploaded, you choose a hub to print for you.  you can pick different materials and colors.  then you have to click on select this hub.  on the next page, you can add the voucher you received from the professor.  once your discount is applied,  just fill in your details, click on submit your request, and you're done.  thanks for watching, and hope to welcome you on 3d hubs soon. 
[ music ]  [ background sounds ]  >> hi there, i am kevin hartman, i am head of industry at google  in chicago, and i will be instructing the next course  in this marketing specialization on digital analytics.  i love this radiohead case.  for a couple of reasons, one is i'm a huge fan of radiohead,  but secondly because this is a very novel  and interesting approach to pricing,  the pay what you will model.  and that case is all about introducing a new, unique model  and then proving that it works, and how do you do that?  you do that by collecting data.  in my course on digital analytics, we're going to talk  about how you identify your objectives,  you then quantify success by defining metrics you'll use.  you go out, you find that data, you get it with certain tools,  and then you perform some decision making and analytics  on it to see if you actually achieve the things  that you set out to do.  so that'll be our course, great tie in to this radiohead case,  and i think you'll find it very valuable.  i'm looking forward to seeing you in class. 
[music]  hello.  today, i'm going to start with a story.  it's a story about a hotel in hong kong.  it was 13 stories high belonged to the hilton company that ran it and  my question is why would it be profitable to dock down a profitable hotel?  this hotel was profitable on paper that money coming in,  the revenue was greater than the money going out, the costs.  but nonetheless, the owner of the hotel decided to demolish this building.  and the reason is the owner of the hotel realized that instead  of a relatively small building of 13 floors that was a hotel,  he could build a huge tall high rise and rent out the space as office space.  in other words, the owner of the hotel realized that he could  make more money by turning this property into a tall high-rise  office tower than a relatively small hotel.  this concept is really one of the core concepts in economics.  it's the concept of opportunity cost and that's the concept that i'd like us to  discuss today and then we'll go over some examples that demonstrate this concept.  so, what is opportunity cost?  the opportunity cost is the true economic cost of any decision,  you can think of it as the value of the best foregone alternative.  and in economics and in our course, when we use the concept cost,  we will always be thinking about the true opportunity cost of any decision.  so in this case, of the hilton hotel.  on paper, the hilton hotel was making a profit.  but if we thought about the alternative of having a high-rise in this place and  we included the forgone profits of this high-rise as part of the costs,  we would realize that actually having the hotel was a non-profitable decision and  we would be better off knocking down the hotel,  building a high-rise and making even more money.  let's think about this concept.  let's try it in another setting and then we'll go through a few examples, as well. 
[music]  what is economics?  my favorite definition is that it is the study of the allocation  of scarce resources to satisfy unlimited wants.  this definition has a few assumptions in it that i'd like us to explore.  the first is that we have scarce resources.  i want to stress here that it doesn't mean that all resources are scarce for  all of us at any point in time.  but that there is at least one resource that we face this issue of scarcity.  so for some of us, this may be land.  maybe we want to grow vegetables and we don't have enough land.  or maybe it's water, or maybe it is not having enough money to make an investment.  or maybe, for some of us, it's time.  i often find myself wanting to do more things than i can fit  in the 24 hours a day that i'm allotted.  the other assumption is that we have unlimited wants.  here again, i do not mean that we want more of everything.  i'm a very lucky person, and i have enough food to eat, i have enough clothing,  i have a big enough house, but  there's at least one more thing that i would like more of in the world.  so, maybe it's more shoes or  maybe it's to help more poor and be able to give more to charity.  whatever it is,  we each have at least one more thing that we would like to do more of.  and that is why we need to allocate our resources to satisfy  these unlimited wants.  it is the need to satisfy these unlimited wants  that has caused the development of markets and trade.  and so in the next few segments, what i would like to do is first  of all explore further this idea of scarcity, and  the second thing that i'd like to do is to try and understand how trade and  market helps us alleviate this issue of scarcity, at least for a little bit. 
[music]  so we know that any point along the production possibility frontier is  a possible point of consumption.  and any point outside the production possibility frontier  is an impossible point because we don't have the resources to achieve it.  and that is why if we are at point a and we want to consume more strawberries,  the only way to consume more strawberries is to give up some of our pumpkins.  but what happens if our technology changes?  for example, what happens if suddenly we learn how to grow strawberries better?  maybe we have a special new compost that especially is good for strawberries.  or maybe we have a new breed of strawberries.  and suddenly for each field that we have, instead of growing five tons  of strawberries, we're suddenly able to grow ten tons of strawberries.  what will happen to our production possibility frontier?  if we devote all our resources to pumpkins,  this technological improvement in strawberries will not help us.  but of course if we devote our resources to strawberries, it will.  if we grew strawberries on all ten fields,  suddenly we can grow 100 or ten times ten tons of strawberries.  so our new production possibility frontier has shifted out.  this shifting out of the production possibility frontier  is a graphical representation of economic growth.  what economic growth allows us to do is to achieve better combinations of goods and  services, with the given inputs that we have.  we still have only ten fields, but  suddenly combinations that were impossible before, are possible now.  for example, we can now move from point a to a point such as point c.  we can get the gain in strawberries without giving up any pumpkins.  so again, economic growth is a shift out of the production possibility frontier. 
[music]  in the previous unit, we learned that we can think of economics as the study  of the allocation of scarce resources to satisfy unlimited wants.  it is the need to satisfy these unlimited wants that has caused the development of  markets and trade.  and in the next unit,  what i'd like to explore is how gains from specialization and  trade allow us to consume outside our production possibility frontier.  i'm going to use an example that's motivated by a famous work  by the late nobel prize winning economist gary becker.  his work is called a treaties on the family and  it explores the family as an economic unit.  my example will draw on the first couple of pages of the seminole work. 
[music]  so, our goal is to think of the family as an opportunity  to trade within the members of the family.  so let's start with a numerical example, where we have two members of a family,  we're going to call them sara and abe.  and each of them has 12 hours a day that they can spend  either making market goods or home goods.  and you can think of market goods historically as maybe hunting, and  home goods as gathering.  or maybe we can bring it to the modern life.  maybe market goods is going out there and working in a job, and  home good is preparing home baked chocolate chip cookies, or some such good.  okay, so they have 12 hours a day that they can spend in each of these two goods,  and what i want to prove to you is that they're better  off combining their resources than working separately.  and the way i'm going to do it is the following.  first of all, we will see what each of them can produce separately.  then i'm going to choose a point on abe's production possibility frontier.  then we're going to combine their production  possibility frontier to see what they can do together.  and i'll show you that once they combine the effort,  sarah can be outside her production possibility frontier,  while abe is still on his production possibility frontier.  so that we have created something from nothing.  okay, so that's the goal.  let's go ahead and start. 
[music]  in the previous example, we see that sarah can produce more home goods per hour and  more market goods per hour.  we can say that sarah has the absolute advantage in producing both goods.  a person or country or firm has an absolute advantage,  if they can produce more per unit of input. 
[music]  hello.  in this unit, we will cover the core concepts of supply and  demand, and i have three goals.  the first goal is to introduce the model,  including some important technical aspects related to the model.  the second goal is to define market equilibrium and  look at the invisible hand.  and the third goal is to demonstrate the power of markets and  start thinking about what happens when governments try to intervene in markets. 
[music]  how do we reach an equilibrium?  this is an amazing idea that was developed by adams.  smith, which is the idea of the invisible hand.  we don't have the government set the price.  we don't have regulation.  we don't have people sort of imagining what the price will be.  it's the power of markets.  there are a lot of sellers out there interacting in the market,  a lot of buyers interacting in the market.  and the market clears at this equilibrium price.  and the reason it clears at this equilibrium price,  is that if it were the price were either higher or  lower that wouldn't work, and the price would converge to the equilibrium.  so let's try and play around with that a little bit.  suppose for example, that the price for  some reason is higher than the equilibrium price.  well, if the price is higher than the equilibrium price,  that means that the quantity supplied is greater than the quantity demanded.  we can read the quantity supplied off, the supply curve.  this is the quantity supplied.  we can read the quantity demanded of the demand curve.  and at this price of 3, this is the quantity demanded.  and so in this case, we have excess supply.  sometimes this is referred to also as a surplus in the market.  there's a surplus of eggs in our example.  well, what does that really mean?  that means that a lot of firms want to sell the eggs, and  consumers are not willing to purchase them, because the price is too high.  and, of course, the sellers don't want to be stuck with moldy eggs or  eggs that go bad, so what the sellers will start to do was to lower the price,  to put the eggs on sale.  and as they lower the price, what happens?  well, first of all, as the price drops, consumers say, well, now i'm interested in  buying a few more eggs and we'll have a movement along the demand curve.  and also, as the price drops, maybe some of the people who were interested in  selling eggs at the price of 3 dollars will now drop out of the market.  they'll decide maybe instead of selling the eggs,  the farmer will decide to eat the eggs, or  maybe instead of selling the eggs as eggs, they will turn them into mayonnaise.  whatever the reason is, there will be a movement along the supply curve.  so again, we have excess supply,  that's pressure on the prices to drop and as we have pressure on the prices to drop,  we have a movement along the supply curve and along the demand curve.  and this pressure for  the prices will, to drop will stop, exactly when we reach the equilibrium.  because when we reach the equilibrium by definition,  quantity demanded is equal to quantity supplied.  okay, so again invisible hand in the case where the price is too high will cause  the excess supply to push the prices down, back down to the equilibrium.  let's try and do that in the other direction.  what happens when the prices are set too low? 
[music]  let's move to the supply side that reflects the wish of firms to sell things,  and here again we will define the supply curve as a graph or  line that shows us the quantity supplied at each price.  so again, this is a function between price and quantity.  it tells us how much do firms want to sell at any given price.  you tell them the price,  they'll tell you how much they're willing to sell at this price.  and our assumption is, is that there's a positive relationship between price and  the quantity that firms are willing to sell.  and there are a couple of intuitions that i can use here.  the first is reminding us that we have increasing opportunity cost.  so, the more we produce, the more expensive it is to produce a good.  because we have to use less suitable resources to produce it.  and so the only way we'll be willing to produce more is if we get compensated for  using these less good resources, in other words, if the price is higher.  so one explanation for why we have this positive relationship between price and  quantity supplied, is that we have increasing opportunity cost.  another intuition that might help us here is for  you to think about your willingness to supply your time.  and the higher is the wage rate, the more of us are willing to go out there and  find a job.  or maybe we're willing to work for more hours.  so that also suggest, right, that the higher is the price.  in the case the price of our time, the wage rate.  the greater is the quantity of time that we,  the sellers of time, are willing to provide.  so either of these intuitions are going to work well for us.  and either way, we get an upward sloping supply.  so suppose again we're talking about the market for eggs.  we're saying is, the higher is the price, the more firms are willing to sell eggs.  maybe more farmers will start selling eggs.  when the price is high.  that could be an explanation for this upward sloping supply curve.  so along the supply curve, again it's a relationship between price and quantity.  and the only thing that changes along the supply curve is the price.  and what we're saying here is when the price is relatively low, for  example $1 per dozen of eggs,  the quantity supplied will be relatively low.  let's say 1,000 dozen eggs for maybe 24 hours in a region,  let's say university city.  but if the price increases to maybe $3 a dozen, more people  will be willing to sell eggs or maybe farms will be willing to sell more eggs,  and maybe they'll rush out there and pay a very high price to get more eggs so  that they can sell them because the price is higher.  and at this price of $3, maybe firms will be willing to sell 4,000 eggs.  okay, what's important here is this relationship between price and  quantity supplied when the price.  price is p1, the quantity supplied is q1.  and when the price is 2, the quantity supplied is q2.  and once again, i want to stress the importance of distinction between supply,  which is this whole curve.  and quantity supplied  which is the quantity supplied at any given price.  so it's a point along this curve.  and i think we're ready to start thinking about what would shift this whole supply  curve, and we'll do that in the next segment. 
[music]  we are ready to put our supply and demand curves together and  define market equilibrium.  so market equilibrium is a price and quantity pair for  which, at that price, quantity demanded is equal to quantity supplied.  let's think graphically what we mean in this case.  we know we have a downward sloping demand, showing us that at lower prices,  people are willing to purchase bigger quantities.  and we have an upward sloping supply showing  us that at higher prices firms are willing to sell bigger quantities.  and there's usually one point where quantity supplied  is equal to quantity demanded.  or the supply curve and  the demand curve intersect and that point is the equilibrium.  and if you think about it that equilibrium is a combination of a price and  a quantity.  at this price the quantity supplied as we read of the supply curve  is equal to the quantity demanded as we read it off the demand curve.  so quantity supplied is equal to quantity demanded at the equilibrium.  so for example suppose that equilibrium price of a dozen eggs is $2.00 per dozen.  at the equilibrium, the number of eggs that people want to buy is  exactly equal to the number of eggs people want to sell.  so suppose, for example,  that the equilibrium quantity is 2,000, what we're saying is the following.  at the price of two dozen,  2,000 dozen eggs are the quantity that people want to purchase,  and two dozen quantity of eggs, that's the quantity that firms want to sell.  so again, at this price, quantity supplied is equal to the quantity demanded. 
[music]  suppose you are a farmer and you've been growing mangoes,  and you're wondering at what price to sell them.  you've learned the law of demand so  you know the law of the price the bigger is the quantity demanded.  therefore you know that if you lower the price you'll be able to sell more mangoes.  but what will happen to your sales or your revenues?  well, let's define revenue.  revenue= p.q,  and as you lower the price, the quantity increases.  so what happens to revenue?  well, it depends which of these is going to be more powerful.  as you lower the price, will the increase in quantity be large or  will the increase in quantity be small?  intuitively, we can already see that if you lower the price and  the quantity increases just by a little bit, you've actually lost revenue,  because you've lowered the price on a lot of mangoes and  you haven't increased the number of mangoes that you sell.  on the other hand, if quantity is very responsive to price,  when you lower the price the quantity will increase by a lot and  the increase in quantity will more than offset the reduction in price and  your revenues will increase.  this relationship between the change in price and the change in quantity,  and their effect on revenue is related to a term called elasticity.  and in today's unit,  i will introduce the concept of elasticity as it pertains to the demand curve.  then, i will define lots of other terms of elasticity, and we'll also look  formally at the relationship between elasticity and revenue.  let's start. 
[music]  i motivated a discussion of elasticities by talking about sales of mangoes and  what would happen when we reduce the price?  what effect will that have on revenue?  would revenue go up or would revenue go down?  let's go back to that discussion with an example of two demand curves.  d1 that is relatively inelastic, and d2 which is relatively elastic.  i've started out off with a certain price, p0, and a certain quantity q0,  so that revenue, which is price times quantity, is just this rectangle.  p0 times q0.  and the revenue is the same on both demand curves.  now let's go ahead and reduce the price.  we'll reduce the price to this new price that i'm going to call p hat.  what happens to revenues?  well it depends what demand curve we're going to look at.  when we look at the relatively inelastic demand curve, d1,  we can see that what happens is that revenue must be going down.  because though the firm is selling new quantity and  selling more mangoes than before, so the quantity increased,  there's a decrease in price on all the previous quantity of mangoes.  so the new revenue, which is p hat  times q1 is actually going to be less the original revenue.  so, when we look at the new revenue, again p hat times q1,  we can see that it's less then the original revenue of p0q0.  in other words, when price dropped, revenue dropped as well.  on the other hand, what happens when the demand is relatively elastic?  when the demand is relatively elastic, the same change in price is going to  bring about a huge change in quantity and  quantity will increase from q0 all the way to q2.  it is true that the firm is losing money on the existing mangos  by lowering the price on them.  but on the other hand, the firm is selling many more mangos than before.  so if we look at our new revenue which is p hat times q2,  we can see that it's much bigger than the original area of p0 times q0.  in other words, p hat times q2 is bigger than the original revenue of p0,  q0 showing us that revenues have gone up.  so we can see that elasticity is related to a change in revenue.  when demand is elastic,  the price decreases and revenue increases.  when demand is inelastic,  price decreases and revenue decreases as well.  let's take another moment to think about this as we think about a demand that has  a unit elasticity everywhere. 
[music]  we've done quite a lot in the course so far.  we started with the concept of scarcity, showing that everything that we do,  there's an opportunity cost, because we're not doing something else.  and we illustrated this graphically with the concept of the production  possibility frontier.  we then discuss how to alleviate this binding scarcity through gains from  specialization and i introduced the idea of comparative advantage.  that led to the need to trade and therefore, to the development of markets.  so we discussed the model of supply and  demand and i introduced the concept of an equilibrium.  where the quantity supplied is equal to the quantity demanded.  so i think we're ready now to start thinking about what are the results  of reaching an equilibrium, and in particular what i'd like us to think  about is what does this mean in terms of efficiency and equity?  you can think of efficiency as asking are we creating as much happiness or  as much surface or as much welfare as we can in our economy.  and equity as asking are we dividing this correctly or  fairly among the people who are involved in the economy.  so what i will do in these next few segments is discuss a measure  of what is generated by the economy trying to measure how much of it is shared by  the different participants of the economy and then i want to prove to you that this  market equilibrium is not just an equilibrium but it's actually efficient.  and i want to discuss with you whether or not it's equitable. 
[music]  market forces, the forces of supply and demand, lead us to an equilibrium,  where quantity supplied is equal to quantity demanded.  that's the power of markets, to converge to this equilibrium.  but there's a result that's really fascinating.  and that is that this equilibrium also maximizes total surplus,  it makes the pie as big as possible.  i'm going to go ahead and prove this, and i'm going to do a proof by negation.  i will start with a quantity that's bigger than the equilibrium quantity.  and i'll prove to you that that reduces total sublease.  then i will choose a quantity that's less than the equilibrium quantity and  i'll prove to you that, that too, reduces total surplus.  and as a result we will conclude that the market equilibrium is  the best of all possible worlds.  let's start, so suppose we're talking about the market for bread, and suppose  that in equilibrium, where supply is equal to demand, the price is equal to $4.  so that this quantity here is the equilibrium quantity at a price of 4.  but what happens if we produce more loaves of bread than this equilibrium quantity?  we'd be moving in this direction, so we'd be somewhere out here.  let's call this q1.  i want to prove to you that q1 is not a loaf of bread that we want to produce.  but it's very easy to see why.  the demand curve reflects the marginal benefit of this loaf of bread.  it tells us how much consumers value this loaf of bread.  and we can see from the fact that demand is downward sloping that they value it at  less than the equilibrium price.  if the equilibrium price is 4 the marginal benefit of this loaf of bread is  something less than 4 for the sake of this example, let's say it's $2.  so that is the marginal benefit of this loaf of bread.  but how much did this loaf of bread cost to make?  well, we can read that off of the supply curve,  because the supply reflects the marginal cost of making this loaf of bread.  so this last loaf of bread, this q1, had a marginal cost up here.  and we can see that this is something greater than $4.  maybe this is a marginal cost of 5.  in other words, to make this loaf of bread,  we spent the extra cost of making this loaf of bread was $5,  and the person who consumed it got a benefit of $2.  in other words, as a society,  what we did here is we took $5 and we converted them to $2.  we took $5 bills, scrambled them up, and out came $2.  obviously, as a society, this is not a very efficient thing to do.  if i asked you, how many of you are willing to give me $5, and  i will automatically immediately with no risk give you $2 back.  i don't think a lot of people would agree to that trade, and yet  that is the trade that we're asking society to do at this quantity.  we're asking society to spend more money than society is getting back.  and that's the case for  any quantity that's bigger than the equilibrium quantity.  for any quantity bigger than the equilibrium quantity,  the marginal cost is greater than the marginal benefit.  so, any quantity to the right of q* is a quantity that we do not want to produce. 
[music]  hello.  in this unit we will explore government intervention and  in particular we'll think about taxes and subsidies.  we've already learned that  in a market equilibrium where supply equals demand we maximized total surplus.  and this implies that every time the government intervene it can only do harm,  it can only have the potential of shrinking the surplus.  and that's what we will cover in today's unit.  but as we do so, i do want us to remember why government taxes and  subsidies certain goods.  in particular, governments often tax a good in order to raise revenues.  they need the money in order to provide goods and  services that we appreciate and want.  so let's remember that.  and the second thing that i want us to remember is that sometimes  government taxes goods in order to deter behaviors that are not good.  for example, they might tax soda drinks to discourage the drinking of  sugary beverages, or they might tax cigarettes in order to deter smoking.  and why do they subsidize goods?  usually to encourage certain behaviors.  for example, the government might subsidize vaccinations  in order to encourage people to go out there and get vaccinated.  so once again let's go ahead and look at these government interventions.  first taxes, then subsidies.  and we'll look at the plus side and the negative sides of these interventions. 
[music]  let's turn now to thinking about subsidies.  subsidies are exactly the opposite of a tax.  instead of the government taking money out of the system,  the government is pouring money into the system.  so that if we have a per unit subsidy the price that the consumers paid.  the subsidy gets added onto it before the producer pockets that amount  of money because the government is adding this money into the system.  so here we have our market before the subsidy is imposed.  in this case, i suppose that we're talking about the market for chocolates and  the market is selling 200 boxes of chocolates at $5 each.  we can see the consumer surplus, the area underneath the demand curve,  and above the price and we can see the producer surplus,  the area underneath the price and above the supply curve.  so the consumer surplus and the producer surplus.  and of course the equilibrium is also the efficient point of production because  at 200 boxes of chocolate, the marginal cost is equal to the marginal benefit.  so now let's go ahead and set a subsidy.  and again, a subsidy is the opposite of a tax.  so instead of shifting the supply curve up, we will shift the supply curve down.  suppose the government is setting a subsidy of $2.00 per box of chocolates  we will have the supply curve shift down by $2.00.  [blank audio] we get a new equilibrium and  we can see that indeed the price to the consumer has dropped.  it doesn't drop by the full $2.00, a full $2.00 less would be down here.  but it falls somewhere between $5 and $3.  so let's choose a price between $3 and $5.  for the sake of my example, let's choose a price of $3.50.  that is the price that the consumers are paying,  and what the producers are getting is $3.50 + $2.00, so  that's $3.50 + $2.00, which is over here and that's $5.50.  okay, so now let's try and  use this graph to find the new consumer surplus,  the new producer surplus, and the new total surplus. 
[music]  let's go through a numerical example.  i'm going to use the same numerical example that we used for price floors and  price ceilings.  where the demand is equal to 70- q, and the supply is equal to 10 + 2q.  we found the equilibrium quantity by setting the supply equals demand and  we found an equilibrium quantity of 20.  we plugged the 20 into the supply equation or  the demand equation to find the equilibrium price of 50.  and consumer surplus is this triangle which is 20 times 20 divided by 2 or  200, and producer surplus is 50- 10,  which is 40 times 20 divided by 2, which is 400.  so that total surplus is 600.  now that we have a tax in place, what we need to do is to realize  that the price to the producer and the price to the consumers are not the same.  because, of course, the government is standing in between  taking some of this money out, so that what the consumer is paying  minus the tax is equal to what the producer is pocketing.  so lets set the tax at $15 per unit.  so again, my tax is going to be $15 per unit.  and now i can set these two equations together,  taking this third equation in to account.  so, what do we have?  we have 70- q, right, the price to consumers, minus  the tax is equal to the price that the producers are getting, which is 10 + 2q.  let's solve this equation.  moving q to this side we get 3q.  moving the 10 to this side we get 70- 25.  which is equal to 45 and we get that q is equal to 45- 3, which is 15.  graphically what we've done of course, is we've shifted up the supply curve  by 15 units, and what we found is this new quantity here.  and we've said that quantity is 15.  we can plug the quantity of 15 back into the demand equation, and  we get the price to the consumers.  as being 70- 15 which is equal to 55.  so this price here is 55 and we can see  that the price to the consumers has increased by $5.  we can take the quantity of 15 and plug it into the supply equation, and  we get that the price that the producers are getting is 15 times 2,  which is 30, plus 10, which is 40.  in other words, this price here is equal to 40.  and we can see that the price to them has dropped by $10.  and just to double check, we can see that 10 + 5 is equal to 15.  so we found the new equilibrium quantity, q1.  we found the new price to the consumers, the price that the consumers pay,  which is 55, and we found the price that the producers get which is equal to 40.  we are now ready to calculate consumer surplus,  producer surplus, government revenues, and total surplus.  let's go ahead and do that. 
[music]  i'd like to introduce the concept of tax incidence, which asks,  how is the burden of the tax shared between the consumers and the producers?  we know that when there is a tax, the price to the consumer goes up and  the price that the producer gets goes down.  we know that the consumer surplus shrinks and producer surplus shrinks as well.  but how much does each party suffer?  that is the question of tax incidence.  we can think of it in terms of how the tax is shared between the consumers and  the producers.  at the original price of $2,  the price consumers paid was the same as the price producers got.  but now that there's a tax, there's a barrier of the tax.  the price to the consumer has gone up from $2 to $2.40.  in other words, the price to the consumers has gone up by $0.40 per bottle of soda.  the price to the producer has gone down.  it went down from $2 to $1.40.  in other words, the price to the producer went down by $0.60.  if we add these two changes together we get, of course, the full dollar.  but we can see that this dollar is not shared equally.  in this example, the consumer suffered 40% of the dollar and  the producer suffered 60% of the dollar.  in other words, in this example,  the tax incidence was more on the producers and less on the consumers.  why was that?  well, the more flexible you are, the more you will change your behavior.  and the more you'll change your behavior,  the less you will suffer the consequence of the tax.  the less flexible you are, the more you will insist on doing what you did before.  and as a result, you will be paying the consequence of the tax.  in this example, the consumers were more flexible.  what do i mean by more flexible?  the demand was more elastic than the supply curve.  why don't you go and  try to graph the situation with various forms of supply and demand?  and prove to yourself that the less flexible you are, the more you suffer  the consequences of the tax, the more the tax incidence falls on you. 
[music]  in this course, microeconomics, we've learned about the power of markets.  how markets deal with scarce resources?  how the model of supply and demand make sure that goods get allocated from those  that can produce them at the lowest opportunity cost to those who value them  at the highest marginal benefit?  we learned that in equilibrium the prices signal to the people who should be selling  the good and who should be purchasing the good?  we've learned that the invisible hand allocates the good, so  that there's no excess supply and there's no excess demand.  quantity supplied is equal to quantity demanded and  we learned that that maximizes total surplus.  the total benefit that can be generated  by a market is maximized at the market equilibrium.  and therefore,  any government intervention must be to the detriment of welfare or their economy.  price floors, price ceilings, subsidies,  taxes, these all change the quantity that the market is producing and  therefore moves us from the top of the hill down below.  it eliminates part of the surplus that is generated by the market.  that's a wonderful conclusion and the first step to being an economist, but  please don't stop here.  consider taking the next course, market failure where you  will learn various conditions with this model does not hold.  cases where maybe we do want the government to step in either through  regulations, maybe through taxes, different policies to alleviate  market failure and to bring us back to the total surplus outcome.  join me for the next course. 
[music]  hello, my name is rebecca stein and  i'll be leading this course microeconomics: the power of markets.  we will start with the concept of scarcity.  we'll be introducing the core idea of economics that every action  has an opportunity cost, and you don't get anything for free.  we'll then see how gains from trade allow us to consume more than we could without  trade, and that there are some gains to specialization.  after that we switch over and we think about a market of a particular good.  and i introduced the concepts of supply and demand.  we studied market forces and how prices converge to an equilibrium.  we'll discuss why market equilibrium is a good thing.  it reduces excess supply and excess demand, and  it maximizes the total surplus that can be generated from a particular market.  we'll end by discussing government intervention, price floors,  price ceilings, taxes and subsidies.  what do they do to their economy?  do they help their economy or  do they impede the total surplus that's generated in the market?  at the end of this course, you should have the key terminology to understand markets,  and to be able to converse with other economists, and  you'll be ready to continue in thinking about when markets fail. 
[music]  i'd like us to practice this concept of opportunity cost with another example.  and let's take this example from the place where i  teach which is the university of pennsylvania.  so when students come to the university of pennsylvania,  they have to pay tuition and fees.  and the tuition and fees at the university of  pennsylvania run very close to $50,000 a year.  now that's not an insignificant amount of money.  but as i remind my students, that is not the true cost of coming to  the university of pennsylvania, because in addition to the tuition and fees,  they also have to pay with their time.  while they are a student here at the university of pennsylvania,  they're giving up some alternative uses of their time.  so, we have to include tuition and fees, but  we also have to estimate the value of time.  so there are many ways we could do that.  one way we could estimate the value of the time is trying to estimate how  much they would earn if they were working full-time during this period.  so i did that, i collected some data on people about the same age as my students,  with the same demographic, the same high school achievement and the same drive.  and i came to an estimate, that if they were working they  would get wages of approximately $40,000 a year.  so what is the true economic cost?  in other words, what is the true opportunity cost of a year at  the university of pennsylvania?  well, we have to include both the tuition and fees and  the wages and we get a hefty bill of $90,000 a year.  and that is the true opportunity cost of a year's education.  so now let's take this concept and  we are going to apply it in a series of numerical examples. 
[music]  the idea of scarcity is represented by the production possibilities frontier.  or the ppf, which is a graph showing the maximal  different combinations of output for a given amount of input.  we can see in this graph that the only way to produce more of one good,  is to produce less of the other good.  so we have this idea of tradeoffs.  it illustrates the idea of the opportunity cost in production,  because the slope represents how much of one good we have to give up,  in order to produce more of the other good.  the ppf, or the production possibility frontiers,  allows us to introduce the concept of efficiency,  which is a concept that we will explore further throughout the course.  efficiency just means no waste, and the first time we're going to look  at efficiency, is the idea of something being productively efficient.  which means that all available resources are being utilized.  another way of thinking about this, is that we cannot produce more of one good  without decreasing the production of another good.  if we are producing along the production possibility frontier,  this is of course, correct.  we cannot produce more of one good,  without decreasing the production of another good.  but if we are inside the production-possibility frontier, this  does not hold, which means that we are not being efficient in terms of production.  we can also use the production-possibility frontier,  as a tool to think about economic growth.  what is economic growth?  it is an increase in the production of goods and services.  we can think of this as a shift of the production possibility frontier out.  why would the production possibility frontier shift out?  well this could be either because there's a technological improvement, or  because there has been some investment in capital goods.  that now allows us to have more inputs, that we can use towards production. 
[music]  let's go back to our example of growing strawberries versus pumpkins.  and once again, let's assume that our production possibility frontier is  bowed out, which suggests that some resources are better devoted to pumpkins,  and some resources are better at growing strawberries.  so that the opportunity cost of growing strawberries is  increasing as we move down the production possibility frontier.  we know that any point along the production possibility frontier is  efficient in terms of production.  but which of these points is efficience in terms of allocation?  which is allocatively efficient?  well, allocative efficient means we're producing the right combination  of strawberries and pumpkins.  right in what meaning?  right in terms of our preferences, how we feel about strawberries and pumpkins.  maybe some of us like strawberries more, and some of us like pumpkins more.  so let's try and model this idea of allocative efficiency.  and i'm going to do it with two concepts.  the concept of marginal cost,  and the concept of marginal benefit.  the marginal cost of a strawberry is  the extra cost of producing another strawberry.  in other words, it is how many pumpkins we have to give up  in order to make this additional unit of strawberries.  and because we've drawn our production possibility frontier as a curve,  i'm assuming that as we produce more strawberries, the cost of  producing an additional strawberry is growing, because the opportunity cost  as we move down the production possibility frontier is increasing.  so if i look at the extra cost of growing strawberries, and i measure it  in terms of pumpkins, i'm going to have some sort of an upward sloping line.  showing that as we produce more strawberries, the extra cost of  a strawberry is increasing, because the opportunity cost of growing a strawberry  is increasing as we move down the production possibility frontier.  what about the marginal benefit?  the marginal benefit of a strawberry is the extra benefit that we get,  the extra pleasure that we get when we consume an additional strawberry.  we'll measure this in terms of how many pumpkins we're willing to give up in  order to consume the additional strawberry.  and our assumption is that the marginal benefit is diminishing or  decreasing, that as we consume more strawberries,  the extra yum of that additional strawberry gets smaller and smaller. 
[music]  so i'm giving some data on our little family here of two people, sarah and  abe, who can split their time between market goods and home goods.  and what i've done is, i've drawn the two production possibility frontiers for  the two of them.  so each of them has 12 hours in the day, and  let's look at sarah's production possibility frontier.  if she spends all her time on market goods, we'll have 12 x 10,  or 120 units of market goods.  and if she spends all her time in home goods, we'll have 12 x 5, or  60 units of home goods.  so that's sarah's production possibility frontier.  similarly we can create abe's production possibility frontier.  he has 12 hours a day, and for each hour, he can make 8 units  of market goods, so 12 x 8 is 96 units of market goods.  if he spends his 12 hours a day producing home goods,  we'll have 12 x 2, or 24 units of home goods.  so these are the two separate production possibility frontier, and  my goal is to see that they can be better off if they combine their resources.  so let's go ahead and choose a point on abe's production possibility frontier.  and the point that i'm going to choose is  assuming that he wants exactly ten units of home goods.  so just eyeballing it, it looks just about something like this.  okay, so this is 10 units of home goods, and  if you work it out, that leaves him 56 units of market goods.  and we can just double check the arithmetic here.  10 units of home goods at 2 units per hour is going take him 5 hours and  56 units of market goods.  at 8 units per hour, it's going to take him 7 hours.  and so this is consistent with his resources, which are 12 hours a day.  so again, this is a point on the production possibility frontier.  he might want to be outside his production possibility frontier, but  that is not possible.  okay, so, sarah could be along any point along her  production possibility frontier, but again, she cannot be outside her  production possibility frontier if the two are working independently.  so now our goal is to try and  figure out what would happen if the two of them combined their resources together. 
[music]  so we seen how combining resources allows us to achieve the gains from  specialization according to our comparative advantage.  but the question is do we always have to combine our resources together?  do we always have to merge with our prospective partners.  and the answer is no, we could also trade with them.  and trade is, of course, advantageous, because then we don't have to marry  everyone we want to gain specialization with.  so let's take the same example and try and think of it in terms of trade.  so if our two friends here sarah and abe want to trade with each other,  we have to think of a price where both of them will agree to the trade.  in our world we don't have dollars yet, so  by price what i mean is the price of one good in terms of the other good.  so let's think of what would be the price of one unit of home good.  well it has to be a price that both of them will agree to.  and my claim is that the price has to be greater than two units of market goods,  that it has to be less than four units of market goods.  and the reason is that the price has to be between the two opportunity costs.  it has to be below abe's opportunity cost or  he won't be willing to buy the home goods.  he will say at a price that's greater than four market goods, i'd rather go and  produce the home goods by myself.  i can produce it at a price of four, so  i'm going to buy it only if the price that you offer me is less than four.  similarly for sarah.  sarah will say well, i'm only willing to sell my home goods  if you give me at least my internal price.  and my internal price is my opportunity cost of two market goods.  otherwise, i won't sell the home goods to you.  instead, i'll reduce the time that i spend on home goods, and  instead i'll spend some more time on market goods.  so this implies that the price has to be between the two opportunity costs.  a price that is closer to sarah's opportunity cost will be better for abe.  he'll be gaining more from the surplus.  and a price that is closer to abe's opportunity cost will be better for sarah.  but any price will do.  let's choose a price between these two opportunity costs, and  let's see how such a price allows these two parties to gain full trade. 
[music]  let's practice this idea of the invisible hand, and reaching a market equilibrium.  starting with a price that's lower than equilibrium price.  so suppose for example that the price of eggs was set at $1 per dozen.  well the problem with this price is that at this price  quantity demanded exceeds quantity supplied.  we can read off the demand curve to find the quantity demanded.  and here it is, right here.  and we can read off the supply curve what is the quantity supplied.  and here it is right here.  and we have excess demand  another of thinking about excess demand is thinking about it as a shortage.  there are lot of people looking for eggs but, there aren't a lot of eggs available.  so what do you think will happen?  there'll be long lines or queues of people waiting to look for eggs.  or maybe there will be a stampede on the stores that are selling  eggs in order to get those eggs at this low price of a dollar.  and because of that the firms will realize that this excess demand and  that people really want the product that they have.  and as a result what they'll do, is they will start raising the price of eggs.  and as the price of eggs starts to go up,  as it converges towards an equilibrium, two things happen.  first of all, some of the consumers are going to give up and are going to say,  i was interested in buying eggs at $1 a dozen, but  i'm not interested at $2 a dozen.  maybe because i can't afford it, or maybe because i already have eggs at home,  so why bother if the price is $2 a dozen?  whatever the reason is, some consumers drop out of the market, so  the quantity demanded decreases and also as the price increases because  the supply curve is upward sloping, quantity supplied will increase.  so we have quantity supplied.  increasing and again we're going to converge to the equilibrium.  the power of the invisible hands says that if the price is too high,  there'll be pressure on the price to drop.  and if the price is too low, there'll be pressure on the price to increase.  and there really is only one price.  that price what quantity demanded is equal to quantity supplied.  that market equilibrium price where things are stable,  where things are in equilibrium.  and that is where the market will converge to. 
[music]  we will start start with the demand side, let me go ahead and define a demand curve.  it's a graph that shows us the quantity demanded at each price.  so, it's a function between price and quantity.  we can write it mathematically, the demand  is equal to the quantity as a function of price.  so let's think what general shape this graph will have.  i think for most goods that we can imagine,  as the price decreases we are willing to buy more of the good.  so if you think of going out there to the grocery store and  buying eggs, that lower is the price of eggs, the more eggs you will purchase.  or clothing is a good example for me.  the lower the price of shirts, the more shirts i'm likely to purchase.  in some cases, a lower price won't encourage us to buy more, but  it might encourage more people to buy.  so for example i have a washing machine, and  if the price drops i'm not going to go out there and buy a second washing machine.  but maybe if the price drops more people will afford washing machines and  go ahead and buy them.  so the general relationship that we find, is that when price drops quantity  demanded increases, and when price increases quantity demanded decreases.  so we have a negative relationship between price and quantity.  let's go and graph this negative relationship.  and here i have to warn you.  despite the fact that we always talk about quantity as a function of price,  when we go ahead and we graph this, we put quantity on the x access or  the horizontal access, and we put price on the y access or vertical access.  so technically speaking what we are graphing is the inverse demand curve,  but we won't use that technical language,  we'll just say we are graphing the demand curve.  and we notice that the demand curve is downward sloping.  the higher is the price, for example, p1.  the lower is the quantity demanded, q1.  and if the price drops to p2 the quantity demanded will increase to q2.  a couple of more warnings here.  i am very careful in the use of terminology here.  and i make a distinction between the demand.  which refers to the whole curve,  and quantity demanded.  [sound] which refers to a particular quantity  that's demanded at a particular price.  so, again, the demand is the whole relationship,  it's the function between price and quantity.  and quantity demanded is a point along the demand curve.  we can talk for example, about how many eggs the market will  be interested in consuming if the price of a dozen eggs is $2 a dozen.  and maybe if the price is $2 a dozen here in the market of the university city,  maybe 5000 dozen eggs will be sold within a week. 
[music]  so, again, a longer supply curve.  the only thing that changes is the price.  the higher the price, the bigger the quantity supplied.  but in real life, things change.  and as things change, so does the whole supply curve shift.  so let's think about a few things that might shift the supply curve.  the first thing is of course the number of firms.  as we have more firms enter the market,  the quantity supplied at any given price will increase.  so suppose, for example,  we have more farmers growing eggs this will be a shift of the supply curve out.  and if we have fewer farmers growing eggs  that would be a shift of the supply curve in.  so again, what do i mean by a shift of the supply curve out?  it used to be that at the price of $2,  the quantity supplied was 2,500 dozen eggs in a period.  but now that we have more farmers at the same price of 2 maybe  the quantity supplied has increased to 3,000.  so that is an increase in the quantity supplied at the same given price.  so that is a shift of the supply curve.  let's think of a few other things that could shift the supply curve.  price of imports is very important here.  as for example the price of feed increases.  it's more expensive to feed your chickens,  you will only sell the same quantity of eggs if the price increases.  so graphically this would be a shift in of the supply curve.  i rather not talk about it as a shift up because that sounds like supply increases.  i like to talk about it as a shift in.  so the supply curve shifts in.  because the price of the inputs has increased, and now,  farmers are only interested in selling the same quantity of eggs  if the price is higher, because they have to be paid more in order to  afford to pay the higher price of the chicken feet.  let's think of a few more things that might affect the supply curve in the next  segment. 
[music]  another note about an equilibrium.  what do i mean by the quantity demanded is equal to the quantity supplied?  at this price of $2, i'm not saying that everyone is purchasing eggs.  the people who purchase the eggs are the people who are willing to purchase  them at a price that's bigger than the price of $2.  so, this is the quantity demanded.  because all these people were willing to buy the eggs at a price that's greater  than $2 and went ahead and bought them at a price of $2 a dozen.  there are definitely some people who are going without eggs.  these are people who might want to buy eggs and  would be willing to buy eggs if the price was lower.  but at this price of $2 per dozen, they are not purchasing eggs.  so the quantity demanded is exactly 2,000 because at the price of $2,  everyone who's willing to buy eggs at a price of $ or above,  goes ahead and buys them and that number adds up to 2,000.  similarly, on the supply curve, what do i mean by the quantity supplied is 2,000?  what i mean is is all the firms that were willing to sell eggs at a price of $2,  or even below $2, went ahead and sold the eggs.  so all these people sold the eggs, so this is the quantity supplied.  there are definitely farmers who would be willing to start growing and  selling eggs, or firms would be willing to purchase more eggs and sell more eggs  if the price was higher, but at this price of $2.00 they are not doing so.  so again, at the price of $2,  2,000 sellers are going out there and selling their eggs.  there is a potential to have more sellers, but that would only be at a higher price.  so at the equilibrium again, quantity demanded is equal to quantity supplied.  that is the meaning of an equilibrium. 
[music]  let's start with elasticity of demand.  elasticity of demand measures the responsiveness of the quantity demanded  to a change in price.  formally we will define it as the percent of change in quantity  over the percent of change in price.  because of the law of demand and because price and quantity are always negatively  related to each other, this is always a negative result or a negative number.  so to make it simpler for us we're going to go ahead and  take the absolute value of this.  and so we get an elasticity of demand.  that can be any number between 0 and infinity.  what are the advantages of looking at elasticity?  well, it going to measure responsiveness and  it's going to measure it in such a way that it's a unit-free measure.  because we're measuring it in terms of percentage change,  this means it doesn't matter how we measure the quantity.  we could be talking about pound of mangoes,  or units of mangoes, or kilograms of mangoes.  all these things we're going to talk about the same in terms of percentage change.  similarly it doesn't matter how we measure price.  we could be measuring it in dollars, or euros, or dinars.  it would be the same percentage change in price.  so it's a denomination free measure.  and, it also is completely irrelevant what good we're talking about.  so we could talk about the elasticity of mangoes, and compare it to the elasticity  of apples or the elasticity of bread, or even elasticity of education.  so all these goods can be compared, because in terms of elasticity,  they are comparable.  they're all in terms of percent to change.  this range from 0 to infinity is a pretty big range.  so let's go ahead and divide into two segments.  we are going to distinguish between goods that are inelastic and  good that are elastic.  a good is going to be inelastic  if the elasticity is between 0 and 1 and  the good is going to be defined as being elastic,  if the elasticity is between one and infinity.  and just if you're concerned about the number 1,  we can call a good that has an elasticity of 1 unit elastic.  and we'll come back to that one in just a minute.  so again, elasticity of demands is measured by the percent of change of  quantity over the percent of change in price, it's always going to be positive,  because we've taken the absolute value.  it ranges from 0 to infinity, and  we make this important distinction between inelastic demand, and elastic demand.  an inelastic demand,  means that the percent of change in price is relatively big.  and the percentage change in quantity is relatively small.  an inelastic demand means that the percentage change  in quantity is less than the percentage change in price.  on the other hand, an elastic demand means that the demand is very  responsive to a change in price and that means the percentage change  in quantity is bigger than the percentage change in price.  in terms of graphing, an elastic demand is going to be relatively steep.  and an elastic demand, all else equal, is going to be relatively flat.  and we'll come back a little bit more to a distinction between these,  in just a couple of segments. 
[music]  let's put together the last two concepts.  the idea that along the straight line elasticity changes and  the relationship between elasticity and revenue.  if demand is elastic, as it is in the top part of our demand curve.  as we lower the price, quantity will increase by a lot.  which means that our revenues are going to increase.  so in this part of the demand curve, as i lower the price and  quantity increases, price times quantity increases.  in the inelastic part of the demand curve, if i continue to lower my price,  my quantity increases but it increases in percentage terms less,  which means that my revenue will start to go down.  so when i graph my revenue.  i find that there's a maximum point here.  and it corresponds exactly to the point where demand is unit elastic.  firms have many goals in mind, but if the goal is to maximize revenues,  or sales, we learn from this that they should set the price so  that elasticity of demand is equal to one.  if they set the price too high they're giving up on the quantity.  they should lower the price in order to sell more.  if they set the price too low, they're giving up on the price.  they should raise the price and  the increase in price is going to be less than what they lose in terms of quantity.  so you want to set the price exactly the point  where elasticity of demand is equal to one. 
[music]  the first question as we think about efficiency and  equity, is thinking about who is involved in this market.  who are the potential members who could benefit from the market?  and in our simple model,the way we have developed it so far,  there are really only two members that are involved in the market.  we have the consumers and we have the producers.  so, when we're thinking about efficiency and equity,  we have to take these two groups into account.  we would like to take into account the consumers and  we want to take into account the producers.  and in our economy the total surplus that's generated by the economy as  a whole is going to be the sum of the two.  so let's start thinking about each of these groups separately.  and i will start with the consumers.  so as we think about the consumers,  what is the benefit that consumers are getting from the market?  well, one way of thinking about this is going back to our demand curve and  understanding what the demand curve is.  the demand curve is a reflection of the willingness to pay by the consumers.  another way of saying this is the demand curve measures the marginal  benefit to the consumers from purchasing an additional unit.  we're measuring here marginal benefit in dollars because the demand curve  represents how much people are willing to pay for an additional unit of a good.  suppose for example that we're talking about the market for  bread in a particular location in a particular point in time.  here is someone who is willing to pay a very high price for a loaf of bread.  why are they willing to pay a high price for a loaf of bread?  it could be that they're very hungry and really want the bread.  it could be that they've been fasting for a day and  just that smell of brad is overpowering and they really dying to have it.  it might be that they're very rich and because they're very rich,  they're willing to pay a very high price for  bread just because they have they have the money for it.  whatever the reason is, this is their marginal benefit for this loaf of bread.  and just for the sake of example let's say they're willing to pay $10 for  this loaf of bread.  but there are many other people who are willing to pay lower prices.  for example, here's someone who's willing to pay $9 and  maybe this person is willing to pay $8, and so on and so  forth, and maybe even some people who are not willing to pay anything at all.  here is someone who has a marginal benefit of zero.  why do they have a marginal benefit of zero?  maybe they don't like bread.  maybe they have a gluten allergy, and the bread is just not healthy for them.  or maybe they don't have the money.  right, this marginal benefit is the actual willingness to pay for  the bread and if you don't have any money in your pocket you're not willing to pay.  now suppose we're looking at a market price of $4 per loaf of bread.  who will end up buying this loaf of bread?  all the people who are willing to pay more than $4.  who won't buy bread?  anyone who's not willing to pay $4.  anyone below this price of $4.  this person here, remember this person was willing to pay $10 for a loaf of bread.  when they walked into the store willing to pay $10.00,  they found out that the price was only $4.00.  did they pay $10.00 or did they pay $4.00?  obviously, they paid $4.00.  they paid the lowest price they were asked to pay, and  they walked out of the store with an extra $6.00.  what do i mean by an extra $6.00?  they worked out of the store, $6.00 happier than they were before  because they were willing to pay $10 and they ended up only paying four.  and if you think of it,  that's the case for anyone who is willing to pay more than $4.00.  so if we add up the area underneath the demand curve and above the price,  we find the willingness to pay over and above what consumers paid for the product.  and we call this consumer sublease.  so again consumer surplus is the willingness to pay or  the marginal benefit of consumers over and  above the price that they paid summed over all the units that were traded.  and graphically this is the area underneath the demand curve and  above the price up to the quantity that's traded in the market.  and this consumer surplus, this is the consumer side of the market.  how much consumers are gaining. 
[music]  we're trying to prove that the equilibrium quantity maximizes total surplus.  we proved that any quantity bigger than the equilibrium quantity is not a good  quantity to produce because for those units,  marginal cost exceeds marginal benefit.  let's now go to quantities that are smaller than the equilibrium quantity.  what happens if we decide to produce this quantity of loaves of bread?  on the face of it, this loaf of bread looks like a fantastic loaf.  in what sense?  in the sense that its marginal benefit far exceeds its marginal costs.  remember, the demand curve reflects the marginal benefit.  so for this unit that we produce and here,  the marginal benefit is clearly way above $4.  for the sake of this example, let's say, this is $8 and the extra  cost of producing this loaf of bread, the marginal cost is much less than $4.  for the sake of this example, let's say, it is $1.  so this loaf of bread is clearly an excellent loaf of bread,  because as a society, what we're doing is we're taking a $1 and  we're converting it into $8.  we're spending $1 to make a loaf of bread that society values at $8.  so here, if i made you this offer and i said,  how many of you are willing to give me a dollar?  and i'll give you back $8 immediately and without risk,  i'd probably become bankrupt very, very quickly,  because this is obviously an excellent trade and we'd all go for it.  som why do we say that this quantity is not a good quantity?  the reason is, is that this graph is a graph about margins,  it's about the marginal benefit and the marginal cost.  we are not asking whether or not this is a good a good loaf of bread to produce.  we are asking whether or not we want to stop here or whether or  not we want to produce yet another loaf of bread.  and in this graph, it is clear that we do not want to stop at this loaf, but  we want to produce at least one more.  let me go and prove it to you.  if we go to the next loaf of bread, we still get a loaf of bread for  which the marginal benefit exceeds the marginal cost.  it's true the marginal benefit is less than $8,  maybe it's $7 and it's true that the marginal cost is above one.  maybe it's two, so  it's true that the additional surplus that we get from this loaf of bread is  less than the additional surplus that we got from the previous loaf of bread.  but nonetheless, this is a trade worth making.  if you'd already said yes to this trade,  you would still say yes to this trade as well.  you're getting a little bit less, but that little bit less comes over and  above what you got before.  so why would you want to stop at this trade when you can go ahead and  make an additional trade?  but of course, that's the case for this situation as well.  why stop here when you can go ahead and make yet another trade?  again, you'll get a little bit less for that extra trade, but  it's over and above what you got before and  that argument will continue all the way to this point here.  this is the only point from which you don't want to move any further,  because if you moved further, then suddenly the marginal cost  would exceed the marginal benefit and now you're starting to lose.  so, let's conclude.  what we've proved here is that you do not want to be on the right at q1,  because then the marginal cost is great than the marginal benefit.  you do not want to be on the left, because then marginal benefit is greater than  the marginal cost and you can gain more by producing more for society.  and so we've proved that you don't want to be on the right,  you don't want to be on the left, you want to be exactly at the equilibrium.  another way of thinking about it is that if you drew a graph of the total  surplus that's generated in the economy,  this equilibrium is the maximum of that total surplus.  moving to the right, moving to the left.  in both cases going, you're going downhill, you're losing altitude,  you're losing some surplus.  and you don't want to do that, you want to stay right at the top. 
[music]  a subsidy, again, can be modeled as a shift out of the supply curve, and  we found that the equilibrium price to the consumers fell, the equilibrium price  to the producers increased, and the equilibrium quantity increased as well.  let's find the consumer and the producer surplus.  and i have to warn you, this graph gets messy very quickly.  consumer surplus is the area underneath the demand curve and above the price.  an irrelevant price to the consumers is the price that they are paying,  it's the $3.50.  so the consumer surplus is the area underneath  the demand curve and above this price of $3.50.  and we can see that consumer surplus has increased.  it clearly has increased because consumers are buying more chocolate and  they pay less for every box of chocolate, so of course, they're going to be happier.  consumers are clearly better off than they were before.  what about producers?  producer surplus is the area underneath the price that the producers are getting,  which in this case is $5.50, and above the original supply curve,  or the original marginal cost curve.  so the producer surplus is the area underneath  this $5.50 and above the supply curve.  and as i warned you, this graph is getting messy because the producer surplus and  the consumer surplus overlap.  but we can see that the producers are also happy, and they are happy because  the price to them went up, and the quantity that they are selling increased.  so, again, let me mark these areas for you.  but, again, let's just remember that they overlap.  the consumer surplus is this whole triangle here, and  the producer surplus, is this whole triangle here.  excellent.  what about total surplus?  if consumers are happier and producers are happier, is society as a whole happier?  and by now we know the result.  no, society cannot be happier, because we've moved from where we were before, and  where we were before, was the efficient outcome.  in other words, we've moved down the hill, we've created dead weight loss.  we know we've created dead weight loss, because at this quantity of 220 units,  the marginal cost exceeds the marginal benefit.  remember the original supply curve is the true marginal cost of production,  and the demand curve is the marginal benefit.  and so for all the units between 200 and 220,  the marginal cost exceeds the marginal benefit.  in other words, there is dead weight loss.  so we can see the dead weight loss here, it's going to be this triangle.  again, because for  all these units, the marginal cost exceeds the marginal benefit.  so, how do we have dead weight loss when both the consumers and  the producers are better off?  the answer is of course because of the government.  remember the government is pouring money into the system.  this subsidy isn't free,  these dollars are dollars that are coming from somewhere else.  they're coming from, they are subsidizing chocolates instead of paying for  new bridges.  they are subsidizing chocolates instead of paying for education.  they're subsidizing chocolates by increasing our taxes.  we can see this graphically,  because the subsidy is $2 per unit times the number of units that are exchanged.  so this rectangle here, this is this subsidy expenditure.  when we calculate total surplus we have to add everyone that's involved in  the market.  and in this case, we have consumers, we have producers and we have the government.  but in this case we add the consumers and producers, but  of course we have to subtract the government because the government is  paying money into the system.  this is money that's lost, because the government is pouring it into this market,  the market for chocolate, instead of using it for something else. 
>> [music]  let's go ahead and calculate total surplus with the tax.  we have, of course the consumers.  the consumer surplus is the area underneath the demand curve and  above the price that the consumers are paying.  so, it's this triangle here.  the height is 70 minus 55 which is 15.  the base is 15, so we get 15 times 15 divided by two,  which is equal to 112.5.  what about the producers?  producer surplus is the area underneath the price that the producers are getting.  which in this case, is 40, and above the supply curve, so it's this triangle here.  and again, an area of a triangle is height times base divided by two.  the height here is 40 minus 10, which is 30.  the base is 15.  so, we get 30 times 15 divided by two, and that is 225.  but let's not forget the government.  we have the government involved, because the government is collecting tax revenue.  and we can see their tax revenues in our graph.  it is the $15 that the government is collecting per unit,  times all the units that are being sold in this market.  and in this case, it's a rectangle with a height of 15 and a base of 15.  so, we get 15 times 15, which is also 225.  so, these are the tax revenues.  if we want to go ahead and calculate total subless.  we have to add the consumers to the producers and  add the tax revenue and we get a total subless that's equal to 562.5.  and we can see that the surplus has dropped.  it has dropped, because we move from the top of the hill, weve shrunk the pie.  by how much has it dropped?  well, the difference between these two is going to be the dead weight lost.  let's go ahead and make sure that we've done everything correctly.  we can see the dead weight loss on our graph, it is this triangle here  the height of this triangle, is of course 15.  so, when we calculate the dead weight loss.  the height of the triangle is 15, because that is the tax of the unit.  the width of the triangle is the amount by which we change the quantity.  which in this case is 5, and it's a triangle so  base times height divided by 2.  and we get a dead weight loss of 37 and a half dollars.  and we can see indeed, that the difference between the total surplus before, and  the total surplus now.  the difference between the two is indeed dead weight loss.  so, if you add the new surplus plus the new deadweight loss.  you get the original surplus that we started off with. 
[music]  let's explore both tax incidence, and what happens in terms of surplus and  dead-weight loss in two extreme cases.  the case of a perfectly inelastic demand, and  the case of a perfectly elastic demand.  so here's the case of a perfectly inelastic demand.  consumers, at least in a certain range of prices,  always want to purchase 500 units of soda.  of course, if the price goes high enough, presumably they'll give up.  so if the price of soda was $5 million per bottle, no one would buy soda.  but at least in a reasonable region that we're talking about,  demand is perfectly inelastic.  that means that if the price goes up, consumers will not change their behavior.  it might be because consumers do not see a substitute to soda.  they're not prepared to switch from soda to water.  as far as they're concerned,  there is no substitute to this wonderful thing called coca-cola or sprite.  in that case, when the government comes in and sets a per unit tax.  and again, the supply curve shifts up by the amount of the tax.  what we get is that consumers who are still insisting on purchasing 500 units  will bear the full burden of the tax.  the price to them will go up by the full amount of the tax,  by the full $1, and go up from $2 to $3.  as a result, what happens is that consumer surplus drops.  instead of being this whole area, it's just the upper area.  and producer surplus, in this case, does not change at all.  so let's find the consumer surplus and producer surplus after the tax.  the producer surplus is what it was before.  it is the area underneath the price minus the tax of $2, and above the supply curve.  so this is the producer's surplus.  and the consumer's surplus is the area underneath the demand curve and  above the new price.  so again, this is the consumer surplus, and this is the producer surplus.  so producer surplus shrank, consumer surplus did not change.  what about the total surplus?  what happened to this area here, is it lost?  of course not.  we have the government, and the government is collecting $1 for  every bottle of soda in this area is tax revenue.  we get that with a perfectly inelastic demand, two results.  the first is, that all the burden of the tax falls on the consumer so  that the tax incidence is completely on the consumer side.  and the second result that we get, is that there's no dead-weight loss.  and again, there's no dead-weight loss because we haven't changed  the quantity that's produced.  again, the metaphor of the mountain, or the hill, the original quantity was  the top of the mountain and we haven't shifted from this original quantity.  and by not shifting, we're still at the top of the hill,  therefore there's no dead-weight loss.  let's do the 2nd diagram.  in the 2nd diagram, we have a demand that's completely elastic.  that means that if price changes even by a little bit,  consumers will shift away from soda and get another drink.  that means there's a perfect substitute.  this would correlate to someone saying, well, i want to drink, but  i don't care what i drink.  i can drink soda, or i can drink water.  and if the price of soda goes up, i will immediately switch to another beverage.  in that situation, what happens is that if we have a tax,  which again shifts the supply curve up by $1,  the amount of the tax, the price to the consumers cannot change.  because if the price changes even by one cent,  all the consumers will shift away from this product and buy something else.  the result is that we have a change in quantity,  but we do not have a change in price.  the quantity will drop maybe from 500 to 400, but the price as  far as the consumer is concerned, stays at $2.  what about the producers?  well of course, someone has to suffer.  and in this particular case, the person who suffers is the producers.  what they get to pocket is $1.  the price to them has dropped by the full amount of the tax.  what about dead-weight loss?  do we get dead-weight loss?  absolutely.  we know that the original supply curve reflects the marginal cost, and  we know that the original demand curve reflects the marginal benefit, and  so the dead-weight loss is the difference between marginal cost and  marginal benefit.  between the original point, which was the top of the hill, and  the new point, which is where we are now.  and if you look at for this triangle, here it is.  this is the triangle that represents dead-weight loss.  so in the case of a perfectly elastic demand, we have two results.  the first result is in terms of tax incidence,  where we see that the full burden of the tax falls on the producers.  and the second thing that we find, is that we have dead-weight loss,  because we have a change in quantity.  so we've moved from the top of the hill, we must be moving down hill.  we must be creating dead-weight loss.  so we've done two cases.  the case of a perfectly inelastic demand,  and the case of a perfectly elastic demand.  let's try doing two more cases.  in terms of a perfectly inelastic supply, and a perfectly elastic supply. 
[music]  so, let's practice this concept of opportunity cost with a few examples.  steve bought a fully refundable plane ticket to florida for  spring break, which cost him $150.  a week before spring break, steve's roommate harry  invites steve to come stay with him in new york over break.  assume this is his only other alternative.  train tickets to new york cost $50, the only expense, and  steve knows that he will get $250 worth of benefit if he goes to new york.  what is steve's opportunity cost of going to florida?  when calculating the opportunity cost,  we have to include both the dollar cost of going to florida and, of course,  also the opportunity cost of time, or the value of time.  now we know what the dollar cost is.  we're told that steve would have to buy a ticket.  and we're told that the ticket  would cost $150.  but there is also the alternative use of the time.  and alternative use of time in this case is going to new york.  so, how will we value the value of time?  what we have to think about is what is the net benefit?  of going to new york.  how much would steve get from going to new york minus the train ticket of going  to new york?  so what is the net benefit?  we're told that he would have a benefit of $250, and  that he would have to spend the price of a train ticket, which is $50.  so the net benefit is $250- $50, or $200.  when we think about the opportunity cost of going to  florida we want to add these two things together.  we want to add the dollar cost and the opportunity cost of time.  so the true opportunity cost of going to florida will be $350.  this does not mean that he shouldn't go to florida.  if he values the trip at florida at a very high price,  if he thinks that will be fun, by all means he should go to florida.  but steve should be aware of the true cost.  and the true cost is not just the ticket, it's also the cost of his time. 
[music]  so what is the right combination of strawberries and pumpkins to produce?  what is the point along the production possibility frontier that is  allocatively efficient.  my claim is that it's the point where the marginal cost  is equal to the marginal benefit.  the point where these two lines intersect.  in other words, in my graph, if these are the marginal cost and  the marginal benefit.  it would be this point here.  this would be not only a point that's efficient to terms of production.  but this point here.  let's call it point m is also the best of  all the points along the production possibility frontier.  let me go ahead and prove this.  and, like many of the proofs that we'll do in this course,  it's going to be a proof by negation.  i'm going to prove that any point except for  this combination, is not an efficient point.  and i'm going to do that by first of all choosing a point where we grow more  strawberries in this and prove that that's no good, and then i'll choose a point  where we're growing fewer strawberries and i'll prove that that's not good either.  so, just for the sake of the example, just to make this maybe  a little bit more intuitive and so we can connect some numbers to this example,  let's just suppose that this point here is the point  where the marginal benefit of pumpkins equals the marginal cost of pumpkins.  i'm sorry, the marginal benefit of strawberries is equal to the marginal cost  of strawberries, and in both cases it's equal to five pumpkins.  in other words, for this last ton of strawberries,  you were willing to give up five tons of pumpkins.  and on the other hand, the benefit of this last ton of strawberries  was also five tons of pumpkins.  and suppose that we do not stop at this point, but  rather instead of stopping at point m, we continue and  we can consume even more strawberries.  and we move to a point such as this point here that i'm going to call point n.  well, what happens at this point?  in terms of the marginal benefit, the marginal benefit of this  additional unit of strawberries is clearly less than five.  right? if this point was five, and  we're moving down the marginal benefit curve,  this point will have a value less than five, maybe, for example, four.  on the other hand, we're assuming that the opportunity cost of growing pumpkins in,  growing strawberries is increasing.  in other words, to grow this additional unit of strawberries,  we have to give up more pumpkins, more than five.  maybe we'd have to give up six pumpkins.  in other words, at this point,  we're giving up more pumpkins than it's worthwhile for us.  we're paying more than we're getting for this good.  it's like paying $3 for a cup of coffee, that you only value at $1.  that seems like a silly thing to do.  so of course, we would choose not to be at such a point.  so we've ruled out, any points to the right of this.  we've ruled out any point to the right of m.  let's now rule out any point to the left of m.  suppose instead of producing this number of strawberries,  we stopped at a smaller number of strawberries.  call this quantity l.  what's wrong with this quantity?  on the face of it, it looks ideal.  the benefit that we get from these strawberries is greater than the costs.  for example, it looks like the benefit here is something like seven pumpkins.  while the cost is maybe only four pumpkins.  this looks like a great trade.  you're giving up only four units to get the benefit of seven units.  that's fantastic.  the problem is, that we shouldn't be stopping at this quantity.  we should continue and move in this direction.  all the graphs that we draw in economics are about the additional unit.  so when we look at the marginal benefit, we're not measuring the total benefit  of eating strawberries but the extra benefit that you get from the extra unit.  suppose that you already consume this number of strawberries and  now you want to consume an additional strawberry.  for that additional strawberry, you'll get the extra benefit along the line.  for example, this extra benefit here of maybe six units.  and the cost?  well, that's what the marginal cost curve measures.  the extra cost of this additional unit is here.  maybe at something like four and a half units.  in other words,  for this unit two, the marginal benefit exceeds the marginal cost.  so if you move from point l and you move  slightly to the right, you're not giving up any benefit you're just adding to it.  you're adding an additional surplus  an additional difference between the marginal benefit and the marginal cost.  if you fail to move in this direction,  it's as if you're leaving money on the table.  there's some extra benefit over and exceeding the extra cost.  but you're not taking into account.  you're not enjoying.  so you don't want to stop at a point where the marginal benefit  exceeds the marginal cost.  you want to get all those, all those units for  which the marginal benefit is greater than the marginal cost, all the way to here.  you don't want to stop as long as the marginal benefit  exceeds the marginal cost.  you want to stop only when the marginal benefit is exactly  equal to the marginal cost.  so again, what we've done here is we've thought through the definition  of allocative efficiency.  we've said any point along the production possibility frontier  is efficient in terms of production.  but there's only one point that we should choose.  and that's the point where the marginal cost is equal to the marginal benefit.  how much you have to give up of one good to get an additional unit of the other  good is equal, exactly, to the amount that you're willing to give up of  that good in order to get an additional unit of strawberries.  this it the type of thinking that we'll be using a lot during this course.  and i know that going through it the first time is a little hard, but i promise  you that as we go through the course and we see this sort of thinking again and  again, it'll become more and more comfortable and easier for us. 
[music]  let's return to the concept of efficiency.  the first time we explored it, we we're talking about productive  efficiency which means are we producing on the production possibility  frontier versus producing inside the production possibility frontier.  but another thing we might want to know is whether or  not we're producing at the right point along the production possibility frontier.  are we producing the right combination of goods and services?  so, let's think about how to do this.  if we're thinking about the right combination of goods and  services, we would like to compare the cost of producing a good and  service to the benefit that we get from producing this good or service.  so, allow me to introduce the concepts of marginal cost and marginal benefit.  in our small world here before we've introduced any prices or any dollars,  we can think of costs in terms of how much of one good we have  to give up in order to produce an additional unit of the other good.  so, i'll introduce the concept of marginal cost.  the marginal cost of a good or service is the opportunity cost  of producing one more unit of this good or service.  and what about the benefit side?  let's define the marginal benefit of a good or service as  the benefit received from consuming one more unit of the good or service.  if we had dollars in our model, we could measure the marginal benefit by the amount  that a person is willing to pay for an additional unit of a good or service.  in our story up to this point, we don't have dollars, but  we can still think of marginal benefit of one good in terms of the other good.  how many units of one good would you give up  in order to receive another unit of the second good?  in most cases, we assume that marginal benefit is declining.  the first unit that you receive from any good will give you very high benefit, but  as you consume more and more of a good,  the extra benefit that you get from the additional unit is probably decreasing.  think of a good that you like.  i often in this case think of bars of chocolate.  the first bite of chocolate or  the first piece of chocolate gives me a huge marginal benefit and a lot of joy.  the second one gives me joy, but just a little bit less than that.  the third, the fourth, the fifth, the sixth, at some point i'm full which means  that if i had to eat more chocolate, maybe i wouldn't even enjoy it anymore.  in other words, the additional unit of chocolate gave me smaller and  smaller amounts of joy.  the marginal benefit of the additional unit was declining or diminishing. 
[music]  so let's go ahead and try and think what sarah and  abe could produce if they combined their resources together.  in other words, we are going to draw the combined production possibility frontier.  so finding the two extreme points is relatively easy if  they both spend all their hours in the market.  sarah would be producing 120 units.  abe would be producing 96.  and so 120+96=216 market units.  on the other hand, if they both spend 12 hours working at home,  we would have sarah's 60 units plus abe's 24 units, and 60+24=84.  so those are the two extreme points.  the question is how are we going to combine these two points.  and here we will remember that there's a connection, right, between  the slope of the production possibility frontier and the opportunity cost.  the slope of the production possibility frontier in absolute value is  the opportunity cost of producing another unit of whatever is on  the horizontal axis in terms of whatever is produced on the vertical axis.  so let's go ahead and calculate the opportunity cost of home goods.  and i'm going to add it right here.  so this is the opportunity cost of 1 unit of home goods.  and remember we measure it in market units.  and we're going to do that for sarah and we'll do it for abe.  for sarah, the opportunity cost of a home good is 10 over 5 or 2.  and for abe, the opportunity cost of a home good is 8 over 2,  which is equal to 4.  so we have two different opportunity costs.  and let's think of that as we go ahead and  we draw our production possibility frontier. 
[music]  we said that any price between the two opportunity costs will be a fair price for  trading.  so let's choose a price between 2 and 4, and let's choose the price of 3.  so suppose the two of them trade 1 home good for 3 market goods.  and for the sake of this example, just to make it a little easier,  assume that there are many abes and many sarahs in the world.  so you don't have to just trade with one partner.  you can trade with as many partners as you want.  well, let's think what this price ratio does to their  possibilities in terms of consumption.  abe looks at this price ratio and says the following.  well, my opportunity cost of producing home goods is greater than 3, so i will  specialize in market goods and i will sell some of my market goods for home goods.  if abe sells all his market goods for home goods,  we will have 96 divided by 3, or 33 units of home goods.  so again, this is 96 divided by the price of 3, or  a maximum of 33 units of home goods.  in other words, instead of being restricted to his production possibility  frontier, abe now has the ability of consuming  on this second line, this further out, or this pink line.  we call this second line the consumption  possibilities frontier.  because as the name suggests, this is the frontier of his consumption possibilities,  the possibilities in terms of what he can consume.  and what does this consumption-possibility frontier depend on?  well, first of all it depends on what his resources were  on his original production possibility frontier.  but it also depends, of course, on the price ratio, and  in this case we set the price ratio of 3.  let's go ahead and draw the consumption possibility frontier for sarah.  so sarah has her production possibility frontier.  she looks at the same price ratio and says the following.  this price ratio of 3 units of market goods  is more than my opportunity cost of a home good.  in other words, it's better for  me to buy market goods than to produce them by myself.  i'd rather be producing here, taking my home goods and  selling them for 3 units of market goods for 1 unit of home goods.  and how many units of market goods would she achieve?  well, 60 times 3 is equal to 180.  so 180, again, this is 60 x 3.  that is the maximum amount of market goods that she could consume.  and joining these two points we have the consumption  possibility frontier for sarah.  and we can see that both of them, with the gains from trade,  are achieving things that they couldn't achieve otherwise.  both of them now have consumption possibility frontiers that are outside  their production possibility frontier. 
[music]  so market equilibrium is a price where quantity demanded is equal to  quantity supplied.  and by definition, an equilibrium is a stable position and it's boring.  the price is stable, quantity supplied is equal to quantity demanded.  job is done and that's the end of the course.  but luckily in the real world things change.  and one amazing thing of the model of supply and  demand it gives us some predictive power.  it lets us think about how things that change in the real world.  what effect they will have on the market price.  so let's practice this idea, the idea that as things change in the real world,  there'll be an effect on the supply and demand, and  what effect that will have on the price and on the equilibrium quantity.  so let's start with something that will affect the demand curve.  we said that one thing that affects the demand curve is a change in income.  one thing we've seen around the world is that incomes have increased.  here in the united states, we have a recession right now.  we don't feel very rich, but as a whole around the world in the last 20 years,  definitely, most people's income have gone up.  and as people's income go up, they buy more of normal goods.  and eggs is a normal good.  so as incomes increase, the demand curve is going to shift out.  and instead of the original demand curve d,  we will have an increase demand d prime.  and we can see that the price of $2 can no longer be an equilibrium price.  because at this price of $2, quantity demanded is out here.  and quantity supplied is still the 2,000 that was supplied before and  suddenly we have excess demand or shortage.  and we know that when we have a shortage,  there'll be pressure on the prices to increase.  and the pressure on the prices to increase will continue  as long as we have excess demand.  and this excess demand will decrease as the prices increase until,  boom, we reach a new equilibrium.  this new equilibrium, p two,  corresponds to a larger equilibrium quantity, q two.  and so, what we've had is an increase in price, and  an increase in equilibrium quantity.  and we've reached a new equilibrium.  so, let's go ahead and iterate.  we start from an equilibrium.  what quantity demanded is equal to quantity supplied, we make a change.  in this case, a increase in the demand.  a shift in the quantity demanded at any price, a whole shift of a curve.  as a result, we have an excessive demand.  there will be pressure on the prices to increase, and  will converge to a new equilibrium.  but the price has gone up and  the equilibrium quantity has increased as well.  go ahead and try and practice this for a shift in of the demand curve.  think, for example, what would happen if the incomes decreased.  or what would happen if tastes change and suddenly we're all afraid of cholesterol?  and we want to cut back on our consumption of eggs.  try to practice this graph with the opposite direction. 
[music]  >> we've introduced the concept of the demand curve and  we said that it's a function showing the quantity demanded at each price.  but it's important to realize that along the demand curve,  the only thing that changes is the price and everything else remains constant.  so as other things in the market change, our whole demand curve is going to shift.  let's practice this idea.  suppose, for example, that we're talking about the market for eggs.  in a certain area, let's say my area here, university city in philadelphia,  in a particular period, let's say this one 24 hour day.  and we're talking about the price of eggs per dozen and  the quantity of eggs demanded per dozen.  and again, along the demand curve the only thing that changes is the price.  so it shows us that the higher is the price, the lower is the quantity demanded,  the lower is the price the higher is the quantity demanded.  but obviously, there are some things that would shift the whole demand curve.  let's try and think of some things that would increase the demand for eggs.  so one thing that could increase the demand for eggs is an increase in income.  most goods are what we call normal goods.  and for normal goods,  as the income increases the quantity demanded at any given price will increase.  so for example, suppose that at a price of $1.50 per dozen.  the original demand curve suggested that people would buy  3,000 dozen eggs in 24 hours a period.  as income increases, people can afford to buy more eggs and  the quantity demanded at this price will increase.  so maybe instead of 3,000 dozen eggs in a 24 hour period,  shops will sell 4,000 dozen eggs.  so again, we've had an increase in the quantity demanded at the same price.  in other words, the whole demand curve has shifted out.  and the reason the demand curve shifted out is because the income increases.  so if we think of things that can shift the demand curve or change  the whole curve [blank audio] one thing  that we want to think about is income and for most goods, what we call normal goods,  as income increases the demand is going to shift out.  so for normal goods income goes up, the demand goes up.  there are some goods for which that isn't the case, and  as your income increases you want less of them.  those are what we call inferior good.  and for inferior goods,  as the income goes up, the whole demand curve is actually going to shift in.  so instead of a movement from d to d prime,  we will have a movement from d to d double prime.  we'll have a movement of the demand curve in.  let's think of some other things that could increase the demand for eggs, and  try to think of some things that could decrease the demand for eggs. 
[music]  what else will shift the supply curve?  one thing that is fixed along the supply curve is the technology.  the ability to make these eggs that we're trading in our market.  and, as technology changes, so does the supply curve.  we usually talk about technological improvements.  for example, suppose we breed chickens that are more efficient in egg production.  such a technological improvement will make eggs more affordable.  it will be easier for farmers to produce them so  that the quantity supplied at any given price will be bigger.  so technological improvement is going to be a shift out of the supply curve.  two ways of thinking about it,  at the same price farmers are willing to sell more eggs than they were before.  another way of thinking about it, is to sell the same quantity of eggs.  they now prepared to sell them at a lower price because they can make them  more cheaply because their chickens are more productive.  so that's a technological improvement.  we forget that sometimes we have technological deterioration.  one of my hobbies is reading about economic history, and  we have cases where societies forget how to do something.  for example, after the roman empire collapsed,  societies forgot how to move water efficiently.  so that is a deterioration in technology.  and in economic terms this would be a shift in of the supply curve.  because now that you can't move water efficiently you cannot produce as much as  you could at the same price or gain a shift in of the supply curve.  other things that will shift the supply curve are things like weather.  so, especially when we're talking about agricultural products we can imagine  that weather is very important.  if the rains come on time, the supply will shift out.  if it's a very dry season and  you're trying to grow something maybe then the supply curve will be shifted in.  so weather is very important in these sort of markets.  and the last thing that i want to mention is expectations of future prices.  and again here it's important to realize that along the supply curve,  the expectations are fixed.  so what shifts the supply curve is actually a change in the expectation.  for example, we thought the price tomorrow is going to increase, but suddenly  now we think the price tomorrow will not increase and might actually go down.  and that will encourage us today to sell more.  so that would be a shift out of the supply curve.  and again, just because i think this is an introductory course and  we have plenty to think about without thinking about expectations,  i am going to put this one in parentheses.  so what have we done so far?  we've looked at the demand curve, we've looked at the supply curve, and  i think we're ready to put the two together.  let's go ahead and do that. 
[music]  what affects the elasticity of demand?  the most important factors is the number of substitutes that are available for  the good.  let's take two extreme examples.  the first is frozen peas.  when you go to the grocery store to buy frozen peas,  you see the different brands of peas sitting right next to each other  on the same shelf at the grocery store, at least that's what happens here in america.  so it's very easy to compare the prices, and  although different brands try to market their product as something very special,  in the end, a frozen pea is a frozen pea is a frozen pea, and the substitutes  are very similar to each other, so the consumers are very price sensitive.  if one of the brands tries to increase their price no one's  going to buy that frozen pea, and everyone is going to go to another frozen pea.  on the other hand, firms often try to have sales on their brand in order to  steal customers from somewhere else.  they know that if they lower the price, the quantity  of people who will go to their product is going to be relatively high.  so this means that the demand for  frozen peas is relatively responsive to price or elastic.  a small change in price will cause a big change in terms of quantity demanded.  let's think of another extreme, the demand for a specific chemotherapy drug.  what will happen if a drug company lowers the price of that drug?  well, they're definitely not going to encourage me to go ahead and purchase it.  thankfully, at least now, i don't need that drug,  so i'm not going to buy it just because it's on sale.  even people who do need a chemotherapy drug are probably going to stick to  the chemotherapy drug that's best for them and that was prescribed to them  by their physician, so they will not be responsive to price.  if the price goes up they probably are still going to stick to  buying that drug if they can afford it, even by paying a lot of money.  and indeed if the price goes down they're not going to rush and  suddenly buy double the does of chemotherapy.  so this means this sort of a good has a very nonresponsive demand curve,  a very low elasticity.  and it's because for  a particular chemotherapy drug there aren't really very good substitutes.  if that's the drug that's good to treat your sickness, that's it,  you're going to stick with that drug.  so again, the most important thing that is reflected  in the elasticities is the number of substitutes.  there a few other things that i want to mention.  one is, what, how big is the expenditure on this good from your general budget?  we usually don't care when a price changes for  something that's a very small amount of our budget.  for example, a package of gum.  and we tend to look at prices a little bit more carefully if they're a big  component of our budget.  so that's another thing that will impact the responsiveness of the demand or  the elasticity of demand.  and the third thing that i want to mention  is the amount of time that you have to adjust.  and this is a very important factor when we think of goods such as gasoline.  if the price of gasoline shoots up, in the short run we don't have much choice, we  cannot change our behavior, we will just purchase the gasoline at the higher price.  but if that price hike is sustained for a period of time,  people will start changing their behavior.  they'll start buying more efficient, fuel efficient cars.  they might decide to move, physically move to a location that's closer  to their workplace so they don't have to spend so much on gasoline.  so the more time has elapsed from a change in price,  the more responsive people will be in terms of changing their behaviors and  therefore, in terms of the quantity demanded.  so let's summarize the things that affect the elasticity of demand.  number one, and most important, is the availability of substitutes.  but it's also important whether or not this is a small share or a big share of  your budget and whether or not you have time to adjust to this change in price. 
[music]  let's think about an interesting case of a demand that is unit elastic everywhere.  in other words it has an elasticity of demand at any point along the graph.  clearly this is not a straight line because along a straight line  elasticity changes.  so here's an example of a unit elastic demand curve.  if elasticity is equal to one that means the change in price  exactly is offset by a change in quantity.  so the percent of change in quantity is equal to  to the percent of change in price.  and that means that revenue, which is price times quantity,  is going to be constant.  so here's an example, when the price is 10, people purchase 5 units of the good so  that revenue is 10 times 5, it's this rectangle.  and if a price drops to $5, people will go ahead and purchase 10 units of the good  and the revenue is 5 times 10, it's this rectangle.  and if demand is indeed unit elastic,  these two rectangles are going to be exactly the same size.  let me give you an example of such a good.  a good example would be a good for  which someone has a fixed budget in mind, that they want to spend on the good.  for example, you might say to yourself,  i'm willing to spend $50 this semester or this year to go to movies.  what would that mean?  that means that you would adjust the quantity of movies that you go and  watch according to their price.  if the price was $10 a movie, you would go out 5 times.  and if the price dropped to 5 you might go out 10 times.  so that's an example of a good for  which you have a unit elastic demand curve, and therefore the expenditure  of this sale is constant no matter what the price is because the percent of  change in quantity exactly offsets the percent of change in price. 
[music]  so again,  we're trying to measure the total surplus that's generated in the economy.  we've discussed the consumer's side, and  now we're about to discuss the producer's side.  so here's our market for bread with quantity and price, and  our upward sloping supply curve.  what is the benefit that producers get from this market?  well, what your producers get?  the get the price at which they sold the bread, but  of course making the bread wasn't free.  there was some opportunity costs, or marginal costs of producing the bread.  there was some extra costs that the producer had to put in place  in order to make the loaf of bread and sell it.  for example, this could be the cost of flour, the cost of labor to make  the bread, the time it takes to go ahead and sell the bread.  whatever these costs are,  the producer gets the price of bread minus these costs of production.  so one way of thinking about this is thinking about the supply curve  as reflecting the marginal cost of production.  where the marginal cost of production is the cost of producing the additional unit.  and we assume that the marginal cost is increasing because we know we  have increasing opportunity costs of production.  so that producing the first loaf of bread is going to be relatively cheap because  you would use the resources that are really good at producing bread.  and producing a lot of bread, that last unit of bread is going to be  very expensive because once we get to produce that bread,  we have to use a very inefficient resource.  for example, we'd have to use me as a baker and  that wouldn't be a very efficient worker to be hiring in your kitchen.  so we have an upward sloping marginal cost of bread and  there's some sort of an equilibrium price.  again, just for the sake of the example, say the price is $4.  what does the seller of the bread get from selling the bread?  well, they get the $4 minus the minimum that was  required to sell that loaf of bread.  the seller would never sell a loaf of bread at less than the marginal cost.  so you can think as the marginal cost as the minimum required to sell the loaf,  because if you're not covering that opportunity cost of selling it, you're  not going to go ahead and sell it if you're not going to cover that extra cost.  the marginal cost of producing the extra unit.  you're not going to sell the extra unit.  so this marginal cost curve is the minimum required to sell the loaf of bread and  the producer is getting $4.  and as long as $4 is more than the minimum required,  the producer is making a little bit extra.  and we can go ahead and sum up all these little bits of extra,  all these differences between the price and the marginal cost of production.  and what we get is the producer surplus.  so again, what is the producer surplus?  it's the difference between the price and the minimum  required to sell the product, which is the marginal cost of production.  graphically, it's the area bound by the price and the supply curve.  from the first unit, and  all the way until the last unit that's exchanged in the market.  and that is our producer surplus. 
[music]  i prove to you something quite powerful and that is that market equilibrium  where supply equals demand maximizes total surplus.  but before i go on i want to make a couple of caveats.  the first thing that i want to remind you is that we take the demand and  supply curve as given.  when we look at maximizing total surplus i'm assuming that consumers  are reflecting their preferences and their income and  the prices of other goods via the demand curve.  and i'm assuming that the supply curve is reflecting  the opportunity cost of production.  so when we're saying that we're maximizing total surplus,  we're saying that's the case given the demand and the supply that we are drawing.  so that's one caveat that i want us remember, and  at some point in our careers as economists we should come back and revisit.  the other thing that i want us to remember is that as human beings we don't  care only about efficiency, we also care about equity.  so we don't only care about how to make the pie as big as possible but  also how is the pie divided.  and that too is something that we should come back and discuss, if not now,  then later on in our career as economists. 
[music]  so let's summarize the case of subsidies,  where the government is pouring money into the economy or into the market.  in that case the price to the consumers drops and  the price of the producer increases, which mean consumers are happier and  producers are happier, but the economy as a whole suffers  because too much is produced, we have dead weight loss.  and the reason again we have dead weight loss is because we've moved from the top  of the hill, so we must be moving down, we must be making the pie smaller.  and for all these units the marginal cost exceeds the marginal benefit which  means we're spending more to make these  units then society is getting back from these units.  so why do government subsidize goods?  one reason could be because they want to be nice to the consumers.  for example, if were talking about a good that is maybe a more necessary good than  chocolate, maybe something like bread, the government wants  to make the good available to everyone and so by subsidizing, they lower the price.  another reason might be that they want to be nice to the producers.  remember, the price of the producer goes up, so  they might want to be nice to their producers.  maybe their producers are big lobbyist.  and that would be a reason to subsidize the good.  but a third reason to subsidize a good might be because the government is  paternalistic and wants to encourage consumers to purchase a good  that otherwise maybe they won't be inclined to do.  so an example of that might be vaccinations.  we might want to subsidize vaccines in order to encourage people to go out there  and consume vaccines or  use vaccines more than they would if the market was competitive.  so those are the objectives for the government, our model suggests that these  objectives create dead weight loss, but if you continue studying  economics you will see situations where the dead weight loss is not created.  so that's something to think about as you progress with future courses. 
[music]  we can interpret a tax graphically as a shift up of the supply curve.  because the only way suppliers would be willing to sell the same quantity  it is if the amount of money that they pocket is the same as before, and  the only way that money would be the same as before is if the consumers  are now paying more per unit.  for example, the only way the suppliers would be willing  to sell $500 is if the price to consumers went up by $1 and is now equal to $3.  why?  3 minus 1 equals 2.  and that is the case for any point along the supply curve.  so we can see that the supply curve has shifted up by exactly $1.  so, per unit tax can be interpreted as a parallel shift up  of the supply curve by exactly a dollar.  couple of things to remember.  the first thing to remember is that this new supply curve does  not reflect the marginal cost of production.  the true marginal cost of production, the cost of labor, the cost of  opportunity costs, the cost of the sugar that's required to make the soda.  all those things are the same, so  the marginal cost curve is still our original supply curve.  the other thing,  of course, to remember is that the price will not go up by the full dollar.  we will get an equilibrium where our original supply curve is  equal to the new demand curve which is right here.  and the price will be somewhere between the original price of $2 and  the price $2 plus the tax which in my example is $3.  so we're going to get a price of soda of somewhere between 2 and $3.  for the sake of this example, let's say that we get  an equilibrium price to the consumer of $2.40.  what i'd like us to do next is to think about the implications of this  to consumers, to producers, and to society as a whole. 
[music]  let's play around with the supply side and think about how the elasticity of  supply affects tax incidence and dead weight loss.  let's start with a perfectly elastic supply curve.  this is a situation where the suppliers are willing to sell any quantity  that consumers want as long as the price is two dollars.  and in our original equilibrium, they're selling 500 units at $2 each.  once we have a tax, we know we can interpret this.  i'll graph it as a shift up of the supply curve and what  we find is that the price to the consumer has gone up by the full amount of the tax.  and the reason is producers are only willing to produce if the price is $2,  so the price to them cannot change.  as a result, the price to the consumers goes up by the full dollar.  so in this case, again,  the price to the consumer has gone up by the full amount of the tax.  so, the tax incidents in this case is completely on the consumers.  again, the same result, the more flexible you are, the less you suffer.  in this situation, the supply curve is completely flexible, which is why the tax  incidents goes on the less flexible side of the market, which is the demand side.  in terms of dead weight loss, we will of course have dead weight loss,  because the quantity shrank from 500 to something less than that for  the sake of this example.  let's say, to 400 units and so  we've gone down from the top of the hill and we'll have dead weight loss.  and again, dead weight loss is because we're not producing where  marginal cost is equal to marginal benefit.  so when we look for the dead weight loss, we have to look between the quantity of  500 and the quantity of 400 between the marginal benefit and the marginal cost.  and lo and behold, our d ead weight class is this triangle here.  so again, in this case, the tax incidence falls completely on the consumers.  and of course, there is dead weight class, because we changed the quantity.  let's go ahead to the last example,  which is the hardest example of a completely inelastic supply curve.  completely inelastic supply curve means that these firms want to sell 500 units  no matter what.  think of it as a supplier that has 500 units in stock and just has to get  rid of them and they'll get rid of them as long as the price is anything above zero.  this is a completely inelastic supply curve.  the reason this case is a little bit difficult to draw  graphically is that we can't shift the supply curve up.  and so instead of shifting the supply curve up,  what we will do is we will shift the demand curve down.  understanding that the true marginal benefit is still at  the original demand curve and this shifted demand curve is  just a reflection of the demand curve once we take the tax into account.  just be careful, because in this case, what we're measuring on the vertical  axis is not the price to the consumers, but rather than price on the supply side.  it is the price that the sellers are going to get and we can see that indeed,  the equilibrium price has fallen by the full amount of the tax.  the difference between these two lines is of course, the tax.  it's equal to $1 and so the price has fallen from $2 to $1.  the price has fallen by the full amount of the tax.  again, the less flexible you are, the more you will suffer.  so in this case, the tax incidence falls on the last flexible side and  the last flexible side in this case are the producers.  so, all the tax incidence falls on the producers.  what about dead weight loss?  well, the supplies are still selling what they sold before.  they still selling 500 units, which means we're still in the top of the hill.  we haven't fallen from the top of the hill, which, of course,  means that there's no dead weight loss. 
[music]  let's think about the next example.  steve bought a non refundable plane ticket to florida for  spring break which cost him $150.  a week before spring break,  steve's roommate harry invites steve to come stay with him in new york over break.  assume this is his only other alternative.  train tickets to new york cost $50 (the only expense), and  steve knows that he will get $250 worth of benefit if he goes to new york.  what is steve's opportunity cost of going to florida?  so, what is different about this example compared to the previous example?  the big difference here is that,  we are told that the plane ticket to florida is non refundable, and  a non refundable plane ticket is really money that has gone down the drain.  this is spilt milk, or the technical term for  this is this money is a sunk cost.  a sunk cost is money that has been paid and cannot be recovered.  and if something is a sunk cost  you might as well ignore it because it's no longer money in your pocket.  it's no longer money that you have to spend.  so when we look at the numbers here, we have to realize that  we can disregard the monetary cost of the plane ticket.  this is no longer a relevant piece of information again,  because the ticket is a sunk cost.  there's still the alternative of going to new york.  there's still a value of time.  there's still the opportunity cost of time.  so we still want to take into account the net benefit of going to new york.  but now, the true opportunity cost of going to florida is just $200.  we do not want to include the $150.  and lo and behold,  suddenly the opportunity cost of going to florida is only $200.  so again,  remember that if we have paid something already, and we cannot recover it.  if there's some sort of resource that we've used, and we can no longer recover  that resource that resource is a sunk cost, and we might as well disregard it.  we will not take it into account when we calculate the opportunity cost. 
[music]  now that we've defined marginal cost and marginal benefit,  we can look at the concept of allocative efficiency.  allocative efficiency is defined as the point where we cannot produce more of any  one good without giving up some other good that we value more highly.  we could think of this as being on the right point  along the production possibility frontier.  a point that we prefer above all other points.  and my claim is that the point of allocative efficiency is  the point with the marginal benefit of the extra unit is equal to  the marginal cost that we have to pay in order to receive that extra unit.  let me go ahead and prove that graphically. 
[music]  we know that the slope of the production possibility frontier is  the opportunity cost of whatever is on the horizontal axis,  which means that we will have a production possibility frontier  with two separate slopes, because members of our household or  our potential household have two different opportunity costs.  sarah's opportunity cost of producing home goods is two units of market goods and  abe's opportunity cost of producing a home good is four units of market goods.  so we know we're going to have two slopes and  the question is how should we draw these two slopes?  should the slopes be like that and like that?  or should their slopes be first this steeper one and then the less shallow one?  so first of all, if i drew two production possibility frontiers and  one of them looked like this with the two different slopes,  first the less steep and then the more steep or  i drew an alternative one that looked something like that.  you would easily tell me that the inside one cannot possibly  be a production possibility frontier, because clearly, we can do better.  we can be on the outside one and  a production possibility frontier is the frontier of our possibilities.  so that's one reason we can reject going first with the high opportunity cost and  then with the low opportunity cost.  but there's another reason, that's really maybe even more fundamental and  more basic than that.  if you have a choice and you can produce something cheaply or  produce something more expensively,  you'll always start off by producing the good in the cheapest possible manner.  only if you run out of the ability to produce it cheaply  would you then go ahead and produce it at a higher price.  similarly, with our little society here.  when we start producing home goods, we will start with a low opportunity cost  of two and only after we've used up all those cheap  hours will we continue with the higher opportunity cost of four.  which means that our production possibility frontier  is going to be bowed out.  first, a relatively low slope and then only the higher slope.  okay, so let's figure out what this point is.  so this point here is the point where  sarah is spending all her time producing home goods.  and if she produces only home goods, then she will be producing 60 units of  home goods and abe is the one who's not spending any time at home.  in other words, he's producing 12 hours worth of market goods or  96 units of market goods.  so now, we've drawn our production possibility frontier.  first, the lowest slope of sarah, of two,  then the highest slope of abe, which is a slope of four.  and we understand that this point is the point of full specialization  where sarah is producing home goods, which she can produce relatively cheaply.  and abe is producing market goods,  because it's very expensive for him to produce the home goods.  so let's think of this as we continue with the proof that trade is a good thing. 
[music]  we used a numerical example to develop the idea of comparative advantage and  how specialization according to a comparative advantage,  allows us to achieve the impossible.  to consume outside our production possibility frontier.  let's take this concept and apply them to a more general situation,  where we have a bowed out production possibility frontier,  a curved production possibility frontier.  maybe in this case, we're producing corn and pumpkins.  now, we have a new interpretation for this curved production possibility frontier.  you can think of it as an economy with many different fields, each of them having  a slightly different opportunity cost of producing corn in terms of pumpkin.  so if you drew a production possibility frontier with many,  many small slopes, eventually, it would look like this, right?  a completely curved ppf.  so here is our production possibility frontier.  any point within it is inefficient, any point outside it is impossible.  and the curve itself, is of course our production possibility frontier.  well, what is trade?  trade is a price ratio between these two goods, and  if we wanted to draw the trade line, or the consumption possibility frontier,  we would have to draw a line that has the trading price with the rest of the world.  in other words, when we draw our trade line or  our consumption possibility frontier.  we want to draw a line that has the slope of the price of corn.  whatever the price of corn is in terms of pumpkins  that will be the slope of our trade line.  now, the trade line is never going to be inside our production  possibility frontier, because at minimum, you can eat what you produce by yourself.  you're only going to trade, if you're going to gain from trade.  it's not going to intersect the ppf either.  because, there again, you will have areas where the line is inside the production  possibility frontier, and you can always consume what you make by yourself.  so you'll never, you'll never choose to be inside your ppf.  in other words, when we draw a trade line,  the trade line is going to be a straight line.  the slope of the line.  is going to be the price of corn in terms of pumpkins.  it's going to be a straight line.  and it's going to touch the production possibility frontier,  exactly at one point.  this trade line, or this consumption possibility frontier,  illustrates the fact that we have gains from trade.  there are points along the consumption possibility frontier that would not  possible without trait, but all possible with trait.  how do we achieve these points?  by specializing, according to our comparative advantage.  anyone who can produce corn relatively cheaply  compared to the rest of the world will be producing corn.  all these people who have a relatively low opportunity cost of corn  will be producing corn, so this will be our production of corn.  and all the people who have relatively high opportunity costs of corn,  relatively steep part of the ppf, they won't be producing corn.  because it's too expensive for them.  instead, they will be producing pumpkins.  so this will be the production of pumpkins.  so this point here is our production point.  that's the point along the ppf that we will choose to produce on.  and the consumption possibility frontier  is the whole set of what is possible for us to consume.  and we can see that our consumption points are outside our production  possibility frontier.  showing that their potential gains from trade.  and that indeed we will gain from trade,  because we have specialized according to our comparative advantage. 
[music]  let's practice what happens to market equilibrium when the supply curve changes.  for example what one of the things that has happened in the last decade is  the change in technology.  we're more efficient in growing eggs.  and this could be through genetic engineering,  through technological development of new ways of hosting the chickens.  but whatever the reason is, there's some technological change and technological  change means the firms are willing to sell the same quantity at a lower price, or  they're willing to sell at the same price at bigger quantity.  either way, a technological change is a shift out of the supply curve.  so what happens if the supply curve shifts out?  at this original price of $2 a dozen, we will now have excess supply.  we can see that at this price of $2,  quantity supplied is now greater than our original quantity  which is still the quantity demanded, so we have excess supply.  and we know that when we have excess supply,  that means that firms want to sell the good and no one wants to buy the good, and  there will be pressure on the prices to drop.  and this process will continue as long as the excess supply, so  we will converge to a new equilibrium where the original demand curve  intersects a new supply curve.  and this will be the new equilibrium, and what we found  is that with technological change, the price of the product is going to drop.  what happens to the equilibrium quantity in this case,  the equilibrium quantity has increased as well.  so we have a decrease in price and  an increase in the equilibrium quantity due to technological change.  again i've modelled the situation where the supply curve shifts out.  why don't you try to model the situation where the supply curve shifts in?  for example, think what would happen if the price of feed for chickens increased.  what effect will that have on the equilibrium price and  the equilibrium quantity of x? 
[music]  let's think of a few other things that could shift the demand for eggs.  so the prices of other goods could affect the demand for eggs.  for example, you can think of a good that is a substitute for egg.  a good that you will either eat eggs or maybe you'll eat something else.  here in america, for example, eggs are commonly eaten for breakfast, and so  are cereals.  so, you can think of cereal and egg as being substitutes for each other.  so supposed for example, that the price of a substitute,  the price of cereal increases, what will happened to the demand for eggs?  the price of cereals goes up, the price of the substitute increases,  people wont buy cereal and instead they will buy eggs.  so, if the price of the substitute increases, the demand for  eggs is going to shift out.  and if the price of cereal drops, people will buy cereal, and  as a result, they wont buy eggs, and the demand for eggs will shift in.  you can also think of goods that are complements with x,  things that you buy together with x.  so i come from the middle east and  we have a dish called shakshuka, which is a mixture of eggs and tomatoes.  and so, how would the price of tomatoes affect the demand for x.  this is a case of a complement.  so what happens if the price of the complement increases?  the price of tomatoes increases.  the price of tomatoes go up.  i don't buy my tomatoes, so i won't be making my shakshuka.  and if i won't be making my shakshuka, i don't need the eggs.  so in the case of a compliment, the price of the compliment goes up.  the demand for my good will actually shift in.  and the opposite is also true, if the price of the compliment goes down.  i buy more tomatoes, i'm going to buy more eggs, the demand for eggs will shift out.  so again, the price of other goods will affect the demand for eggs.  what else?  i'm sure many of you thought of things like taste or weather,  or an advertising campaign.  for example, if we learn that eggs don't have as much cholesterol as we thought,  maybe we'll go out there and we'll rush and buy more eggs.  this will be a shift of the demand curve out.  and if, for example, we are all convinced to be vegans,  that's a change in taste and that will shift the demand curve in.  okay, people tend to eat more eggs when the weather's cold.  that's a shift of the demand curve out as the weather changes.  and you can think of other such changes.  i'm going to lump them all together under this rubric of taste,  of the demand shifters.  last but not the least,  i just want to mention the importance of expectations about future prices.  if i know for example, that the price of eggs will increase tomorrow,  i might rush out there and buy my eggs today, instead of waiting until tomorrow.  thinking about expectations is technically a little bit difficult,  because along the demand curve, we have expectations.  and what shifts the demand curve is not the expectations themselves, but  actually a change in these expectations.  i find thinking about future prices and the change in our expectations,  a little bit challenging in this part of our career,  so in my course, i'm going to skip this part.  you will see we'll have plenty to practice and think about,  as we think about the effect of income, prices of other goods, and  things regarding taste, weather, and so on. 
[music]  i mentioned that elasticity of demand is always positive because we've  taken the absolute value and it ranges between zero and infinity.  i'd like to spend a moment talking about these two extremes,  the extreme of zero and the extreme of infinity.  what does an elasticity of zero mean?  that means that it doesn't matter what happens to the price,  the quantity demanded doesn't change.  so no matter what is the percentage change in price,  the percentage change in quantity is going to be zero.  if you graph this, you will see that it is a completely vertical demand curve.  we call this the perfectly inelastic demand.  so this is the situation where the elasticity of demand is equal to zero.  and what this means is, is that people will purchase the same amount of the good,  no matter what the price is.  it's hard to think of real world examples where the demand is perfectly inelastic.  but let me give you some goods that might help you intuitively think through this.  my favorite example, is always to think about things like cigarettes.  if you think of cigarettes.  people who are addicted to cigarettes, it doesn't matter what the price is.  they will continue and purchase the same quantity.  if you're the type of person that smokes maybe two packs a day,  you'll purchase the two packs if the price is $1 a pack.  you'll purchase two packs if the price is $2 a pack.  and you'll even purchase when the price is $4 a pack.  presumably if the price is high enough, maybe you'll give up, maybe you'll try and  stop smoking, maybe you'll try and get a nicotine patch instead.  so you might try to change your behavior, but if you're really addicted to  the product, that means the demand is perfectly inelastic.  and you'll go to very long lengths to find the money to pay for  that product, even when the price is very high.  so again, thinking about the type of good someone might be addicted to,  is a good helpful intuitive example to think about,  when you're trying to think about a perfectly inelastic demand.  so that's the one extreme.  the other extreme is when elasticity of demand is infinite.  and graphically this is a completely horizontal demand curve.  and we call this a perfectly elastic demand curve.  that's a situation where even a small change in price,  causes an infinite change in quantity.  in other words, it's an example where if the price goes up even by one cent,  people will say no thank you, i'm not interested in this product.  i'm going to get something else.  and it must be the case that it is a good for  which very close substitutes, perfect substitutes are available.  here again, it's very hard to think of real world examples,  i sometimes think of two soda machines.  two machines where you put a dollar in and you get a soda can.  what happens if one of these machines increases their price to $2?  these two machines are sitting right next to each other.  one of them costs $1, the other one costs $2.  no one's going to buy their soda from the machine that asks for $2.  everyone is going to go to the one that costs $1.  so that's an example where the demand for  the soda cans in this environment is perfectly elastic.  because there's no ability for one machine to raise the price,  because no one is going to go to that machine.  everyone is going to the other machine.  so again, two extremes.  perfectly inelastic demand, which is the vertical line and  the perfectly elastic demand, where elasticity of demand is  equal to infinite, which is the horizontal demand curve. 
[music]  elasticity measures the responsiveness of one variable to another variable.  and they're many elasticities we could look at but  i'd like to introduce you just to a few key terms.  let's start with cross price elasticity, which measures how the change in  one price affects the quantity demanded of another good.  so as we change the price of y, how will that affect the demand for good x?  the good that we're interested in.  we've seen these terms already of substitutes and  complements, as we looked at what affects the demand curve.  for example, suppose i have the demand curve for peanut butter.  and suppose that peanut butter and jelly are complements,  which means that we use them together, as indeed here in america we often do,  we have peanut butter and jelly sandwiches.  as the price of jelly changes, that will shift the whole demand curve.  but let's think in what direction.  suppose the price of jelly falls.  as the price of jelly falls, people will go out and purchase more jelly, and  with it, they'll have to purchase more peanut butter,  because you want to make your jelly and peanut butter sandwiches.  so if you have more jelly, you need more peanut butter.  so as the price of jelly drops, the demand for peanut butter shifts out.  so the quantity demanded of peanut butter increases when the price of jelly drops.  so for complements, the elasticity,  the cross price elasticity is going to be less than zero.  as the price of jelly drops the quantity demanded of peanut butter increases and  vice versa.  if the price of jelly increases, you buy less jelly and  you'll want less peanut butter to go with it.  on the other hand, let's think of two goods that are substitutes.  let's think of tea and coffee.  suppose for example that the price of coffee falls.  you go to the store, you find that coffee is cheaper, you'll buy more coffee, and  as a result, you might purchase less tea.  in other words, as the price of coffee falls,  the whole demand curve for tea is going to shift in.  so a drop in the price of coffee means less quantity demanded of tea.  so these two variables, the price of coffee, and  the quantity of tea are walking in the same direction.  in other words, for substitutes, the cross price elasticity is greater than zero. 
[music]  so again, a market is composed of consumers and producers, and  we can define the benefit that goes to each one of these components.  consumer surplus is the area bound by the demand curve and  the price, so it's this triangle here.  and producer surplus is the area bound by the price and  the supply curve, so it's this area here.  and the total surplus that's generated by the economy is the sum of these two,  because it's only consumers and producers that are involved in this economy.  so, a couple more things that we need to discuss.  the first thing that i'd like us to think about is whether or  not this market equilibrium maximizes total surplus.  what would happen if we deviate from this market equilibrium?  for example, if we decided to produce more, or if we decided to produce less.  what would happen to the total surplus?  and i want to prove to you that this total surplus would only shrink.  in other words, that this total surplus is actually the maximum  that can be generated in this market.  and the second thing that i want us to think about is,  how does this relate to equity?  how can we use these terms of consumer surplus and  producer surplus to think about fairness?  about how the pie is divided in our market?  so let's go ahead and do that. 
[music]  we've seen that market equilibrium maximized total surplus and  of this will be that if we deviate from the market equilibrium.  we will be reducing the total surplus that's generated in the economy.  so if the government intervenes in a competitive market in terms  of trying to change the price or trying to change the quantity, there must be some  negative consequence of this and i'd like to explore this in a couple of segments.  so, one way a government might intervene in the market  is by setting a price ceiling.  in the market for bread, for example,  which is the market that we are going to analyze here.  it might be the case that the government decides that the equilibrium price is  too high, that people can't afford to buy bread when the price is $4 and so  the government might intervene and set what is known as a price ceiling.  i denote this by p with a line on top showing that the price cannot  exceed this price ceiling and for the sake of this example,  let's say that it is a price ceiling of $3.  a price ceiling of $3 means that no one can buy and  no one can sell bread at a price that exceeds $3.  well, what will happen as a consequence in our market?  at a price of $3,  we can read off the demand curve what will be the quantity demanded.  and we can see that the quantity demanded will be much larger than it was at  a price of $4, because demand is downward sloping and  a lower price encourages more consumers to go out there and look for a loaf of bread.  on the other hand, at this low price of bread of $3,  the quantity supplied is going to be much smaller than the equilibrium quantity.  we can read off the supply curve what would be the quantity supplied and  we find that it's down here.  so in this case, we have excess demand or shortage.  so we have excess demand for bread.  physically, this will look to us, if we were looking  into this market as a long line of people outside stores.  there'd be a lot of people looking for the bread that wasn't there,  because suppliers could only be prepared to sell the smaller quantity.  if the market was a competitive market, market forces would bring this price  up and we would converge to the equilibrium price of four.  but in this case, market forces aren't working,  because the government is there enforcing this price ceiling.  we assume in our models that the amount that's actually traded in the market is  always the minimum of the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied.  we are not going to force someone to sell when they don't want to sell.  we're not going to force someone to buy when they don't want to buy.  so the amount that's actually traded is the minimum of the two,  it's going to be this quantity here.  as a result, the units that are not traded are all  these units here and these units are all units for  which the marginal benefit exceeds the marginal cost.  in other words, these are units that should be produced,  because these are units that if they were produced would increase total surplus.  by not producing these units, we are cutting off a little bit of the pie.  instead of total surplus being this whole big triangle here,  it's now just this trapezoid and we've cut off this little bit of a triangle.  we call this piece of total surplus that we've cut off and  thrown away, we call this dead weight  loss, because this is lost to the total surplus that's generated in  the economy and it's loss that's due to the government intervention.  again, the metaphor of the hill.  if this equilibrium quantity is the top of the hill, it maximizes the total surplus.  we've moved in this direction, which means we necessarily have moved down the hill.  we've moved from the top downwards.  we've got rid of some of the surplus.  we'd left some of the surplus on the table, we've not generated these units.  and by not generating them, we're creating dead weight loss. 
[music]  let's summarize before we continue.  we have two results, one about efficiency, or whether or not there's dead weight loss  created because of the tax, and the other one is about equity, or  about tax incidence, how is the tax burden shared between consumers and producers.  in terms of efficiency, we can see that a tax that is imposed on a perfectly  inelastic demand or on a perfectly inelastic supply, creates no dead  weight loss, because in both cases, we are not moving from the original equilibrium.  so, there is no dead weight loss created, we were efficient before and  we are efficient now.  on the other hand, the way the tax burden is shared  is the more inflexible you are, the more you suffer because of the tax.  and here we have four extreme cases.  if the consumers are perfectly inflexible, they bear the full burden of the tax.  the price to them goes up by the full amount of the tax.  on the other hand, when consumers are completely flexible,  they will not bear any burden of the tax.  and the full tax incidence will fall on their producers.  from the supply side, if the suppliers are perfectly inelastic,  if they are inflexible, then the full burden will fall on them.  and they will see their price drop by the full amount of the tax.  on the other hand, when producers are fully flexible,  then their burden will fall on the consumer side, and  the consumers will see the tax increase by the full amount of the tax. 
[music]  let us investigate the consequences of taxes.  but before we do so, a quick reminder of the market without taxes,  where the supply equals the marginal cost, the demand equals the marginal benefit and  we have an equilibrium where quantity supplied is equal to quantity demanded.  suppose we're talking about the market for soda.  the price of a soda is $2 and 500 units are exchanged.  we now have to find the total surplus that's generated in this market  because of course we have consumers and producers.  the consumers get a consumer surplus, which is the area underneath the demand  curve and above the price, and it is this triangle here.  and produces get producer surplus, which is the area below the price and  above the supply curve, which is this triangle here.  so the total surplus that's generated in a market without taxes is,  of course, just the sum of consumer surplus and producer surplus.  what happens when we have a tax?  first of all, we said that with a tax,  we can interpret the supply curve as shifting by the amount of the tax.  so we have a vertical shift up by the per unit tax,  which in our case is $1 per unit.  and we get an equilibrium here, and  we said that the equilibrium price is somewhere between $2 and $3.  and for the sake of this example, it is $2.40.  how much are the producers pocketing.  well, if the consumer is paying $2.40,  what the producer is getting is $2.40 minus $1.  which is [blank audio] $1.40.  so now we can go ahead and we can find consumer surplus and producer surplus.  consumer surplus is, of course, the area underneath the demand curve and  above the price, but  the relevant price is of course the price the consumers actually pay.  which is $2.40, so the consumer surplus is the area  underneath the demand curve and above this $2.40.  this area here is the consumer surplus.  and we can clearly see that with the tax the consumer surplus is smaller and  of course it has to be smaller because the consumers are paying a higher price,  and they are purchasing a smaller quantity, the equilibrium quantity  is of course less than 500 units, maybe it's something like 450 units.  what about the producers?  the producers are not getting $2.40, they're only getting $1.40,  and so their producer surplus is bound by this lower price, and  the original supply curve.  so the producer surplus is this triangle here.  and again, we can see that the producers are worse off than they were before,  because the price that they get is lower, and  the quantity that they're selling is smaller.  so they're selling less and  they're getting less per unit, of course they're not as happy as they are before.  so what is the total surplus that is generated in the economy after tax?  why don't you think about that for a second and then watch the next segment? 
[music]  [music]  so let's try this next example that is slightly more complex.  ellie's tuesday morning class was cancelled.  she now must decide how to spend her extra time.  she has three mutually exclusive options for activities.  go to the library and study for her econ midterm, which costs her nothing and  which she values at $10, go to a movie, which costs her $5,  and which she values at $30, or  have lunch with a friend, which costs her $10 and which she values at $55.  what is ellie's opportunity cost of having lunch with her friend?  like in the previous examples, we want to take into account  both the cost of going to lunch and the opportunity cost of ellie's time.  the difference is that in this example,  ellie has two alternative uses of her time.  she could decide to go to the library and study for her midterm.  or, she could decide to go to a movie.  so let's go ahead and calculate the net benefit of each one of these options.  we'll take into account the benefit, and we'll take into account the dollar cost.  and the difference between the two will be the net benefit.  if ellie goes to the library, we're told that the benefit of studying is  equal to $10, and we're also told that the cost is zero.  so the net benefit of going to the library is ten dollars.  if ellie goes to the movie, we're told that the benefit of going to the movie is  $30, but there's a cost of going to the movie and it is $5,  which means the net benefit of going to the movie  is 30 minus 5, or $25.  ellie can only do one of these two things.  so, presumably she would chose the best of these things, or  at least we have to take into account the next best alternative.  and the next best alternative is the alternative with the highest net benefit.  and in this case, it is going to the movie.  so, now we're ready to calculate the opportunity cost of going to lunch.  and, we realize the opportunity cost of going to lunch includes what?  it includes the dollar cost of going to lunch, and  it also includes the opportunity cost of time, or the value of time.  the dollar cost of going to lunch, we're told, is equal to $10.  the opportunity cost of time is the foregone net benefit of the best  alternative, which is the movie, so that would be $25.  and and so we see that the opportunity cost of  going to lunch is 10 plus 25, or $35. 
[music]  so let's explore this concept of scarcity, using the tool called the production  possibility frontier, which is a graphical representation of this  idea that the only way to get more of one good is to give up another good.  and let's think about two of the goods that i  find myself thinking about the most.  and they are the goods of education.  and health care.  now of course, any society,  we would like to have as many people as we can be as highly educated as possible.  and similarly, we'd like to have, look after our people,  in terms of their health and provide the best possible health care.  but we only have so many resources.  there are only so many people that can be allocated to either teaching or  looking after people's health.  there are only so many buildings.  some of them can be devoted to schools for education.  some of them can be devoted to hospitals for looking after people's health.  so one way of thinking about this trade-off is by  drawing this production possibility frontier.  the production possibility frontier makes a distinction between all the combinations  of education and health care that are possible, and all those combinations  that are not possible, that are outside the production possibility frontier.  any point on the production possibility frontier is a possible point  of production, as is any point inside the production possibility frontier.  so points such as point a is a possible combination of education as health care.  points such as b and c are possible combinations of education and  health care that society can produce.  but a point such as point d is not a possible point  with the resources that we have.  we would like to be at point d, but it is an impossible point to achieve.  so this production possibility frontier shows us this tension  between having unlimited wants and only having scarce resources.  the other thing that the production possibility frontier allows us to think  about is the trade-off, the fact that if we are on the production possibility  frontier, the only way to produce more health care is to give up education.  and the only way to produce more education is to give up health care.  for example, suppose we were at point b, but we wanted to get more health care.  well, we couldn't move in that  direction because that would be outside the production possibilities frontier.  that's not a possible outcome.  but we could move down the ppf in this direction.  we could produce more health care, but  there would be a cost, it would be at the cost of losing some education.  the slope of the production possibility frontier shows this trade-off.  the only way to move from point b to point c,  the only way to increase the consumption of health care is  by decreasing the amount of education that we can have.  so the slope of the ppf represents the trade-off or  the opportunity cost of producing whatever is on the x-axis. 
[music]  in this example.  sara should specialize in producing home goods because she can produce  them at a lower opportunity cost.  another way of saying this is that sara has a comparative advantage in producing  home goods.  a person or nation has a comparative advantage in  an activity if they can perform that activity at  a lower opportunity cost than others.  in this example, sara has the comparative advantage in home goods and  abe has the comparative advantage in producing market goods. 
[music]  so let's finish off this unit by spending a moment talking about imports and  exports.  any point along the production possibility frontier is a possible point of  production, but of course we will choose the point of tangency between  our consumption possibility frontier and our production possibility frontier.  because we'll specialize according to our comparative advantage.  but we can consume at any point on our consumption possibility frontier.  which point you would choose depends on what you like.  do you relatively like more pumpkins or do you relatively like more corn?  just for the sake of the example for today's example, let's assume that this  is the preferred point along the consumption possibility frontier.  this is the point that makes our society the happiest, and  again it depends on our preferences.  what would this mean?  this would mean that this is the consumption- of corn.  in other words, we're consuming more corn than we're producing.  how can we eat more corn than we make?  well, that is because we're trading with the rest of the world.  we are importing- this difference.  similarly, what's happening in terms of our consumption of pumpkins?  we really like corn, which means we don't really like to eat so many pumpkins.  this may be this point here,  this is our consumption of pumpkins.  in other words, we're producing more pumpkins than we're consuming.  what are we doing with all those pumpkins that we're making and we're not eating?  well of course what we're doing is, we're exporting them.  so this is our export of pumpkins.  so with this quick little model of production possibility frontier and  consumption possibility frontier,  we are really starting to see some major ideas in terms of trade.  we can see how the trading price affects the slope of this line.  we can see the fact the only way to consume more than we produce  is by exporting some of the other good.  and we also see how we want to specialize according to our comparative advantage.  we want to produce those units of corn that we can produce relatively cheaply.  we do not want to produce those units  that we could produce only at a very high price.  instead of that, we want to produce some pumpkins and sell them for this cheap  corn that is what allows us to be outside our production possibility frontier. 
[music]  a model, it has very strong predictive power, when we make one change at a time.  when we only shift the demand curve or we only shift the supply curve.  it's a little bit more problematic when we have a few changes simultaneously.  so, let's just go ahead and practice that.  think about what happened in, maybe the last 20 years.  when we've had both an increase in income and an improvement in technology.  so, we start off with an equilibrium, equilibrium price and  equilibrium quantity.  and now we want to make these two changes.  and increase an income for a normal good, will be a shift of the demand curve out.  that's the first change.  and then simultaneously with that, we have a change in technology and  an improvement in technology is going to shift the supply curve out.  so we have both these changes happening at the same time.  what happens to the equilibrium price and quantity?  well, we know what will happen to the equilibrium quantity.  because both these changes are encouraging us to exchange more in the market.  the consumers want more goods, so that's the shift out.  and firms are willing to sell more goods, because of the improvement in technology.  that's a shift of the supply curve out.  so we know for  sure, that the new equilibrium quantity is going to be bigger.  we've had a shift in that direction, but  it's not completely clear what will happen to the price.  the shift out of the demand curve, encourages price to increase.  but the shift out of the supply curve, encourages the prices to go down.  and what will happen to the price, depends which of these graphs we shift more.  the way i drew it here, it looks like the price won't change at all.  but that's just a coincidence, that's just the way i drew my graph.  why don't you practice this?  try to make these two changes, and  draw a situation where the demand curve shifts a lot.  and the technological change is very small, and  you'll see that the price goes up.  on the other hand, if the demand curves just shifts a little bit, but  the technological change is overpowering, than the price will drop.  so again,  the predictive power of this model is very good when we do one change at a time.  when we do more than one change, we have to be careful and  we have to start thinking about magnitudes, as well. 
[music]  one income i'd like us to think about is income elasticity that asks what is  the relationship between the change in income and the quantity demanded.  in other words, the whole demand curve.  we know that for most goods, as income goes up, the whole demand  curve is going to shift out because at any given price, we'll want more of the good.  for example, in the top graph here, i have shoes, and for shoes,  as income increases, i'll want more shoes at any given price.  so this what is known as a normal good.  an increase income will shift out the demand curve and  quantity demanded will increase in any price.  so for a normal good, the change in income and the change in quantity are in the same  direction, which means that the income elasticity is greater than zero.  but of course, there are some goods for which that won't happen.  it's quite possible that your income goes up and you want less of a good.  an example of this might be public transportation or public bus.  income goes up, you don't need to take the bus anymore.  instead, maybe you can take a taxi or take uber.  or buy a lamborghini to drive around.  so, when your income goes up, the demand is going to shift in.  and the quantity demanded at any price will decrease.  so, an increase in income will decrease the quantity demanded.  income goes up, quantity demanded goes down.  the two things work in the opposite direction, so  elasticity of income is going to be less than zero.  so again, our original term, demand elasticity,  was about the responsiveness of the demand curve.  these concepts, cross price elasticity and  income elasticity, are asking about the whole change in the demand curve.  does the demand shift out, or does the demand shift in?  in the case of elasticity of demand, we took the absolute value, and  therefore we only looked at terms between zero and infinity.  in these two terms, cross price elasticity and income elasticity,  we're really concerned about the shift.  is the demand curve shifting out or is the demand curve shifting in?  so we want to know whether or not the elasticity is greater than zero or  less than zero, and that's what the focus is going to be on. 
[music]  i'd like to take a moment just to warn you that along a straight line demand curve,  elasticity is not constant.  we know that along a straight line the slope is constant.  but slope and elasticity are not the same concept.  let's go back to the definition of elasticity.  percentage change in quantity over percentage change in price.  we can approximate the percentage change in quantity  as the change in quantity over quantity.  and we can approximate the percentage change in price as  the change in price over price.  rearranging this, we get that elasticity is equal to the change in quantity  over the change in price times price over quantity.  now of course this first term is the slope, or  it's actually one over the slope.  so this term is constant.  but this term changes as we go down the demand curve.  as we go down the demand curve, the price drops and the quantity increases.  so along the demand curve, elasticity changes.  and specifically in the top region demand is elastic  with a elasticity of demand greater than one and down towards the bottom  demand is inelastic with an elasticity of demand less than one.  let's think through a quick,  numerical example to convince us that that's the case.  suppose we're talking about the mango market or the market for mangos.  and suppose that at a price of $8,  one person wants to buy one pound of mango's.  and suppose the price drops to $7 per pound and now two  pounds are being in the market.  a relatively small change in terms of price.  a change about 10% has doubled the quantity of mango's from one to two.  so again, a relatively small change in price,  brought us a big responsiveness in terms of quantity.  which means elasticity of demand is greater than one.  if we go to the bottom of the demand curve and we do this again,  we can think about what happens when the price drops from one $2 to one dollar.  in terms of the change in quantity, in terms of the slope,  we should have the same effect.  so for example, quantity demanded might increase from nine to ten,  but what does this mean in terms of percent change?  the percent change in price here is about 50%.  right?  it's a 50% drop in price, and the change in quantity is only about 10%.  so here a big change in price in terms of percentage points caused  only a small change in quantity in terms of percentage terms,  which is why elasticity of demand is less than one.  so again, along a straight line demand curve, slope is constant, but  not elasticity, as we go down in this direction, elasticity drops.  the top part is elastic, the bottom part is inelastic.  somewhere in the midpoint, there's elasticity equal to one, and  let's try and remember that. 
[music]  governments often intervene in markets by setting price ceilings.  but in some markets they tend to intervene by setting the price floors.  and the labor market is such an example.  so let's think for a moment, about a labor market.  so in the labor market it is, we, the people who supply our time.  so we represent the supply side, and  it is firms that are interested in hiring us so the firms represent the demand side.  like any other market we have price and quantity, but  we have slightly different notation.  we use weight rate to represent the price of our time.  and instead of counting us in terms of unit, we count people in terms of l or  labor, maybe in terms of hours worked in a week, or  the number of people looking for a job.  so we'll use l for the quantity of labor and w for the wage, the price of labor.  and in an equilibrium quantity supplied is equal to quantity demanded,  we had an equilibrium level of employment at an equilibrium wage rate.  so in this case, $6 an hour.  suppose the government feels that $6 an hour is not high enough,  because it's very hard for people to live off $6 an hour.  here in america, $6 an hour even if you worked 50 hours a week,  it would be very hard for you to pay your rent and your bills and  have enough food, and be able to pay for things that your children need.  so, it will not be here in america a living wage.  so the government intervenes and sets a price floor, we call that a minimum wage.  so a price floor is a price that cannot drop below a certain level.  so suppose for example that the government sets a price floor of $10 an hour.  what would happen at this price floor?  well, we can see that we will have a situation where quantity supplies  exceeds quantity demanded.  we can read off the supply curve how many people want to go ahead and find a job.  this is the quantity of labor that's supplied.  but at this higher wages firms only want to hire fewer people, so  we can lead off the demand curve.  what is the quantity of labor demanded?  and lo and behold, we have excess supply.  some textbooks and some teachers call this a surplus.  i prefer to call this excess supply.  in the market for labor, you could think of this as involuntary unemployment.  people are looking for a job because they've heard the wage is $10 an hour, and  they want to work at $10 an hour but those jobs are not available.  in terms of total surplus, again remember that the amount that's  exchanged in the market is always the minimum of the quantity supplied and  the quantity demanded.  and the minimum of the two is right here and lo and  behold we have a situation where we've cut off a little bit of the pie.  once again, we have some surplus that is not generated.  here people, firms want to hire and indeed these people would like to work, but  the firm is not able to hire them because the wage is left artificially high.  so this, again, is the situation,  where some of the surplus is cut off and thrown away.  once again, we have dead weight loss.  and once again, we are not maximizing total surplus.  i like to give this example for a couple of reasons.  first of all, i'd like to remind ourselves  that intervening in a market is always problematic.  that even when the government has really the best of people in its mind, and  really wants to benefit the market and benefit the people who live in a country.  intervening in a market is going to be detrimental.  and in particular, with a binding price floor,  it's quite likely that some people will not be employed,  will be laid off, and it's quite likely that we'll have some dead weight loss.  the other reason that i want to go over this market is because i think it's  really important to understand that we care about two things.  we care about efficiency, and we care about equity.  and sometimes these two goals are in conflict with each other.  from an equity perspective,  we might really want people to have a living minimum wage.  we have to realize that in certain conditions, and  when the markets are perfect and functioning properly, if we intervene in  the market will be moving down the hill, we'll be cutting some of the pie,  we'll be shrinking that amount of surplus that's available.  and we have to be aware of this tradeoff between efficiency and equity. 
[music]  so what is the total surplus that's generated in  the economy once we have taxes?  we might be tempted to think only of the consumers and the producers.  but of course the government is collecting revenue through the tax system.  and those revenues that the government is collecting,  it then gets back to us in society as things that we value.  it gives this money back to us in terms of bridges, in terms of schools,  in terms of national defense, things that we care about.  so this tax money is not lost, it is not forgotten.  it's collected and then returned.  we can see this tax money on our graph, because the government is  collecting one dollar for every unit that's exchanged in the market.  in other words,  this rectangle here is the tax revenue that's collected by the government.  and this tax revenue is part of the surplus that's generated.  so when we calculate the total surplus with tax we have to think of the consumer  surplus, the producer surplus but we also have to think about the tax revenue.  without taxes, the tax revenue is, of course, zero.  but with taxes, it's this rectangle and we mustn't forget it.  so what is the total surplus that's generated in the economy without taxes and  with taxes?  without taxes, it was this whole green triangle here.  it was the sum of the consumer surplus and  the producer surplus, it was this nice area here.  but now with taxes we can see that a little bit is lost.  if we calculate total surplus with taxes, we can see that it is  the consumer surplus, the tax revenue and  the produces but we're still missing a little bit of this shape.  it's not really a triangle.  it's a trapezoid.  we've cut off a little bit of the triangle there.  what is the part that we cut off?  well, we can see it graphically [blank audio] right here.  this is the amount of surplus that's deducted from the economy through the tax  system.  and this area is called dead weight loss. 
[music]  let's try our hands at this next example that was suggested to me by one of my tas.  a recent opinion piece in the local paper defended the decision of the police  department to purchase $100,000 worth of expensive new police cars.  the author argued that the police department recently  raised $120,000 by auctioning off property seized from drug runners.  out if which they paid $10,000 in salary to the police auctioneer's.  since the property would just have molded away in storage if they didn't sell it,  the purchase costs their tax payers nothing.  what was the actual cost of the purchases to the tax payers?  so this example has a lovely story, right,  the police seize this property from drug runners, it's in their possession.  they decide to auction it off.  they raise money through the auction, and  they used the money to purchase police cars.  so we have all these numbers here, 100, 120,000, 10,000.  but let's forget those numbers for a moment and  really think about what is the true cost of these police cars.  suppose the police department auctioned off the stolen property and  decided not to buy the police cars.  what else could they have done with this money?  well they could have done a lot of things, right?  they could have hired more police staff.  they could have renovated the building.  maybe they could have donated it to the local school and  then money could be used to improve education, or  maybe they would have just written a check to me for $100,000.  in other words there are many alternative uses of this money.  so this money is not free.  the police department decided to use the money to buy police cars.  but this money is real money that could be used for something else.  in other words, the cost of buying the police cars in this case  is just the true dollar cost of $100,000.  isn't that a tricky question? 
[music]  let's demonstrate the production possibility frontier with  a numerical example.  so suppose we have ten fields.  and in each of these fields, we can either grow pumpkins.  or, we could grow strawberries.  and just to be more specific, let's say in each of these fields  we can either grow ten tons of pumpkins, or maybe we could,  on each of these fields, grow five tons of strawberries.  so now let's draw a production possibility frontier, and  i'm going to put strawberries on the x-axis and pumpkins on the y-axis.  if we devoted all ten of the fields to growing pumpkins,  we would be able to grow 100 pumpkins, right?  10 x 10 = 100.  on the other hand, if we devoted all our fields to strawberries,  we would be able to grow 50 tons of strawberries.  again, ten fields times five tons per field is 50 tons of strawberries.  what about combinations between these two goods?  well, so far i've told you that each of these fields is identical, so  when we think about the production possibility frontier, in this case,  please note that it's going to be a straight line combining these points.  so again, why is this a straight line?  because each of these fields is identical.  so, as we shift our fields from ten fields devoted to pumpkins to, for example,  nine fields devoted to pumpkins, and one field devoted to strawberries.  and then another field devoted to strawberries and  another field devoted to strawberries.  as we go through this process,  we are always giving up the same number of pumpkins.  let's think about various combinations.  for example,  suppose that we wanted to devote six of our fields to growing pumpkins.  six fields devoted to growing pumpkins would lead 60 pumpkins.  if we have six fields devoted to pumpkins,  we have four fields remaining that we can devote to strawberries and  in that case, we'll be able to grow 20 tons of strawberries.  let's call this combination, combination a.  now suppose we want ten more units of strawberries, so  instead of being in combination a, we would like to move to combination b,  that allows us to have 30 units of strawberries.  well the only way to do that is to give up two of the pumpkin fields and  devote them to strawberries.  and if we take away two of the pumpkin fields,  then how many pumpkins do we have left?  we have four fields of pumpkins left,  which will yield us only 40 pumpkins.  so, why did i go through this numerical example?  not because i'm so crazy about arithmetic, but because i wanted to demonstrate that  the slope of the production possibility frontier is precisely  the opportunity cost of growing strawberries, in terms of pumpkins.  as we move from point a to point b, we are giving up 20 pumpkins,  in order to receive ten strawberries.  so the slope of the production possibility frontier  in absolute value is equal to the amount of pumpkins that  we give up in order to get an additional strawberry.  in other words, it's equal to the opportunity  cost of one strawberry, in terms of pumpkins. 
[music]  so let's go ahead and prove that combining resources is actually a good thing.  we've drawn the two production possibility frontier.  here's abe's, we chose a point on the production possibility frontier that  abe wants, which is 10 units of home goods and 56 units of market goods.  we've drawn the combined production possibility frontier, and  we've seen that if they completely specialize,  then sarah will be producing 60 units of home goods and  abe will be producing 96 units of market goods, and the last step is to show  that if they, on the combined production possibility frontier,  sarah can magically achieve something that was impossible to achieve before.  so let's do that last step.  and let's calculate what sarah will be able to consume  if they combine their resources.  so, if they combine their resources,  they could be at any point on the production possibility frontier.  but let's just assume, for the sake of this proof,  that the point that they choose is this point, the point of full specialization.  and at this point, abe is making 96 units of market goods.  and sarah is producing 60 units of home goods.  so, what is sarah left with at the end of the day?  what is sarah's share, with these combined resources that they are producing?  well, let's look what happens in terms of market goods.  we know that abe is producing 96 units of market goods,  out of which he will eating 56,  so that leaves sarah with 40 units of market goods.  what about home goods?  well sarah's making the home goods, and she's making 60 units of home goods.  but of course, she has to give abe his share, which is 10 units.  and that leaves her 50 units of home goods.  so at the end of the day, abe, again, is on his production possibility frontier and  this is the share that sarah ends up with.  now my claim is, is that sarah is better off than she could possibly be  if she were producing by herself, and we can go ahead and prove that.  let's try and figure out how many hours  it would take sarah to produce this bundle by herself.  to produce their market goods, 40 units of market goods at her rate,  which is 10 units per hour, this would take her 4 hours.  and what about the home goods?  50 units of home goods at 5 units per hour, this would take her 10 hours.  and we add this together, and we can see that it would  take sarah 14 hours to achieve this share.  another way of showing that is finding this point of 40 units of market goods and  50 units of home goods on the production possibility frontier.  50 units of home goods is just about here.  40 units of market goods is just about there.  and lo and behold, this point is this point here, and clearly,  this is outside sarah's production possibility frontier.  in other words, what we've done is the following.  we've proven that by combining their resources, abe and  sarah can achieve the impossible.  abe achieves exactly what he could before, but  sarah achieves something that was not possible before.  in other words, we've created something from nothing. 
[music]  we have done a lot in this in this unit, we introduced the concepts of supply and  demand and we discussed the market equilibrium and  we also discussed the power of markets and how markets converge to an equilibrium.  what happens when thing shift this demand curve?  what happens when various effects affect the supply curve?  and how do we converge to a new equilibrium?  there's one more important concept that we have to come back to and  that is what happens when the government tries to intervene in this market?  how will that affect what happens in this market?  we will come back to this.  there are few concepts that we have to do in between and  you will see how in the next few sediments, we'll come back and  we will explore this concept of supply and demand much further. 
[music]  we've looked at elasticities on the demand side, and  i'd like to spend just a couple of minutes looking at elasticity on the supply side,  or elasticity of supply, which measures the responsiveness of the supply curve.  we know that supply curves are upward sloping, that a change in price or  an increase in price will increase the quantity supplied.  but the question is by how much?  and that is what the elasticity of the supply measures.  so all supply curves are upward sloping, but  they can be relatively mildly upward sloping, or they can be relatively steep.  so in this example, s0 is a relatively elastic supply curve.  a change in price changes the quantity supplied by a lot.  and this is a relatively inelastic supply curve,  you're supplying basically the same amount, no matter what the price is.  let's think here of two extremes.  the completely inelastic supply curve and the completely elastic supply curve.  a completely inelastic supply curve, or  a curve with a supply elasticity of zero is going to be a vertical line.  this is a firm that has a quantity to sell,  maybe 50 pounds of mangoes and will sell that product no matter what.  this is a good example maybe facing a seller who has a perishable good.  if you're a fisherman, and you start selling fish you're going to sell them at  the going market price, because otherwise your fish will go bad.  another extreme is the completely ollastic supply curve.  and that is the horizontal supply curve, and  in this case the elasticity supply is equal to infinity.  this is a firm that says the following at a going price,  let's say $5 per pound, i'm willing to sell all the quantity that i have.  but if the price drops even by $0.01, i'm not interested in selling.  and this must be an example where the seller has another  output where they can sell their good.  so another market, and they say to themselves, well, if i'm not going to sell  it to this consumer i can go ahead, and i can sell it somewhere else.  and that's why they're not willing to sacrifice a lower price.  so again, elasticity of supply looks at the responsiveness  of the quantity supplied to the price.  so it's the percentage change in quantity supplied over the percentage  change in price.  we're looking at how steep the supply curve is, the steeper it is,  the closer is, the elasticity of supply to zero,  the less steep it is, the closer it is to infinity.  so elasticity of supply is going to be between 0 and infinity.  the closer it is to 0, the less elastic is the supply.  the closer it is to infinity, the more elastic is the supply curve. 
[music]  i'd like us to practice,  what we've learned in terms of market equilibrium finding consumer surplus,  producer surplus, and total surplosu with a numerical example.  so i have two simple equations here.  the top one is of course a supply equation.  we can see that it's a supply equation because of the positive relationship  between quantity and price.  so it's an upward sloping line, and  we have a demand equation, and we can see that is a demand equation because  of the negative relationship between price and quantity.  so it's downward slopping line, and let's start by finding the equilibrium.  and the equilibrium is of course where is supply is equal to demand, so  all we have to do is set these two equations equally to each other.  so 10 plus 2q is equal to 70 minus q, or  moving this q on that side we have that3q is equal to 60 or  the equilibrium quantity is equal to 60 over 3, which is 20.  so we found equilibrium quantity, this quantity here where supply  equals demand and we said that is the quantity of 20,  and to find the equilibrium price we just have to take this quantity of 20 and  plug it either into the demand equation or the supply equation  to find the equilibrium price, and plug in 20 into here.  we have 2 times 20 is 40 plus 10 is equal to 50 and  i always like to double check it with the other equation 70 minus 20 is 50 as well.  so the equilibrium price is equal to $50, so  we have an equilibrium price, we have an equilibrium quantity, and  now we can go ahead and we can find consumer surplus and producer surplus.  so consumer surplus is the area underneath the demand curve and above the price.  let's go ahead and calculate that.  the intercept here is 70, so this is the intercept, and  finding the consumer surplus is therefore just finding the area of a triangle, and  a reminder an area of a triangle is the height times the base divided by 2.  and the height here is 17 minus 50, which is 20.  the base is equal to 20,  so when we calculate consumer surplus it  is 20 times 20 divided by 2 or equal to $200.  so, the amount of benefit that goes to the consumer's  from this market is equal to $200.  what about producer surplus?  the intercept here is equal to 10, so we have to go ahead and  figure the area of this triangle, right?  the area underneath the price and above the supply curve and  again it's height times base divided by 2.  the height here is 50 minus 10 which is 40.  the base is still 20, so we want to go ahead and calculate producer surplus.  it's going to be 40 times 20 divided by 2,  which is equal to $400.  so we've gone ahead and we calculated producer surplus and  we calculated consumer surplus, and therefore the total surplus  that's generated in the economy is just the sum of the two.  200 plus 400 is equal to $600.  another way of saying that is that given a supply equation and  a demand equation the market is 600, i'm sorry.  given our supply equation and our demand equation our society  is $600 happier with trade than without trade.  so this is the total surplus that is generated in the economy  from having a market in this good and trading 20 units. 
[music]  let us summarize, before we move on.  what we found is that, with taxes the total surplus in the economy shrinks.  the difference between the total surplus that we had originally and  the total surplus that we get, once we have taxes.  that difference is called, dead weight loss.  and the dead weight loss is this little triangle here.  so that if we add the dead weight loss to the surplus after the tax,  we got back to the surplus that we had, originally.  again, remember the metaphor of being in the top of the hill.  we were at the top of the hill, at the original equilibrium of 500 units.  we moved away from that equilibrium.  we must have gone down the hill, lost some of our height, and  of course, shrunk a little bit of our pie.  and that shrinking or that loss of surplus, that is a dead weight loss. 
[music]  why is it the case that in my general example of a production  possibility frontier, i assume that it is a curve,  but in this numerical example, i got a straight line.  it boils down to this idea of opportunity cost.  in this numeric example i was assuming that all the fields are the same, and  so as you move the fields from one good to the other good,  the trade off remains constant.  but suppose that wasn't the case, suppose some fields were better for  producing pumpkins, and other fields were better for producing strawberries.  well in that case, in the beginning as we moved our fields from the production  of pumpkins to the production of strawberries, we presumably would give up  a field that actually wasn't very good at producing pumpkins,  but is very good at producing strawberries.  in which case we would only have to give up a few pumpkins  to get those additional strawberries.  but as we continued production, eventually we would get to a point  where we only have really good pumpkin fields.  and it is those fields that we're devoting to the production of strawberries.  in that case, we would have to give up a lot of pumpkins in order to get  that additional unit of strawberries.  in other words, a curved production possibility frontier shows us that  along the production possibility frontier, the opportunity cost isn't constant.  in the beginning, the opportunity cost of producing whatever is on the x  axis is relatively low in terms of the y axis.  but past a certain point, it's going to be pretty high.  as we move in this direction, the opportunity cost of growing  strawberries in terms of pumpkins is increasing. 
[music]  so where was the magic in this story?  how is it possible that just by combining resources, suddenly these two  people could achieve something that was impossible to achieve before?  the thing that we need to focus on is this issue of the opportunity cost.  we can see that the two members of society have different opportunity costs.  and this means that if each one concentrated on what they could achieve  best, they could actually gain by sharing or combining their resources.  this the idea of specialization.  if we each specialize according to what we have or where we have  lower opportunity cost, we'll be able to really get something from nothing.  in this case what is happening is that abe is purchasing  sarah's cheap time for producing home goods, and  sarah is producing abe's cheap time of producing market goods.  and that's what allows us to achieve these gains from trade.  so let's take this intuition and add to it maybe some technical terminology. 
[music]  in this unit i introduced the concept of elasticity.  which measures the responsiveness of one variable to a change in another variable.  and we have covered a lot of terminology, elasticity of demand, compliments,  substitutes, elastic, inelastic, perfectly elastic, perfectly inelastic,  elasticity of supply, normal goods, inferior goods, relationship to revenue,  the list goes on and on.  what was the purpose of this?  i had two goals in mind.  the first goal is to make sure that we can convey information accurately and  clearly when we talk to each other and  the second point was to make you more of an economist.  for you to be able to talk the language of other economists so  you're part of our club and that we can have a communication together and  learn together as we progress through this course. 
[music]  i'd like us to use a numerical example to look at the effects of a price ceiling.  we found using the supply equation and the demand equation  that we have an equilibrium price of 50 and an equilibrium quantity of 20 units.  suppose the government decides that the price of 50 is too high,  and instead sets a price ceiling at $40 a unit.  graphically, we know that the amount that's exchanged in the market is going  to be the minimum of the quantity supplied and quantity demanded.  let's go ahead and find what is the quantity demanded at this price of 40 and  what is the quantity supplied at this price of 40.  let's start with the quantity demanded.  what we do here is we plug the price of 40 into our demand equation.  and we get 40 is equal to 70 minus quantity demanded or  quantity demanded is equal to 70 minus 40 which is 30 units.  so at this lower price, quantity demanded is, of course,  greater than the quantity demanded at a higher price,  and precisely in this case, the quantity demanded is 30 units.  similarly, we can go ahead and  find the quantity supplied at this price ceiling of $40.  we'll do that by plugging 40 into the supply equation.  we set 40 is equal to 10 plus 2 times  quantity supplied, and we get that 2qs  is equal to 30, or qs is equal to 15.  not surprisingly, quantity supplied at this binding price is less  than the quantity supplied at a price of 50, because supply is upward sloping.  and at a lower price, sellers will be willing to sell only a smaller quantity.  so we can see the quantity supplied, i'm sorry, quantity demanded exceeds  quantity supplied, and again, we have a shortage or excess demand.  and in this particular case, we have excess demand of exactly 15 units.  30 minus 15 is 15.  what about the total surplus that's generated in the economy?  at equilibrium, the total surplus was this whole triangle here.  but now we have the government intervene, and the amount that's  exchanged in the market is the minimum of quantity supplied and quantity demanded.  the amount that exchange in the market is going to be limited to 15 units.  and so what we're losing is this triangle here.  this triangle here is our deadweight loss.  let's go ahead and calculate deadweight loss.  again, an area of a triangle is height times base divided by two.  it's easy to see what the base is, we were producing 20 units,  now we're producing 15 units, so the base here is equal to 5.  what about the height?  the height is the difference between this price of 40 and whatever number this is.  so we have to go ahead and calculate this number.  the way we do that is by using our equation of the demand curve.  we take this quantity of 15, and we plug it into our demand curve.  so we get the marginal benefit at a quantity of 15  units is whatever the demand curve tells us.  70 minus the quantity of 15, and  we get that the marginal benefit is $55.  so this number here is $55.  now we can calculate the height.  the height is 55, i'm sorry 55 minus 40, which is equal to 15,  and we have everything that we need to calculate deadweight loss.  again, a deadweight loss is the height.  so that's 15 times the base, which is five divided by two,  and that in dollars is equal to our deadweight loss.  what is the meaning of the deadweight loss?  we calculated total surplus at the equilibrium, and  we found that it's equal to $600.  we can compare that to the total surplus at the price ceiling of $40,  and what we will find is that it's equal to  the original $600 minus our deadweight loss.  okay, so that's the meaning of the deadweight loss.  it's the shrinking of the total sub less by the amount of the deadweight loss,  due to the fact that the government stepped in and set a price ceiling. 
[music]  so how was this possible?  how could abe and sarah combine their resources and produce at a point that  suddenly outside one of their individual production possibility frontier.  to understand that, we have to go back to our original data that we have here.  if we look at the original data we can easily see that sarah, in some sense,  is better at both goods.  she can produce more market goods than abe can per hour, and  she can produce more home goods that abe can per hour.  the technical term for this is that she has an absolute advantage.  someone has an absolute advantage if they can produce more of a good  per unit of input.  and in this case, sarah has the absolute advantage,  in both market goods and in home goods.  but for the sake of our example here, that really is not important,  what is important is that they have different relative advantages.  or the technical term for it is comparative advantage.  someone has a comparative advantage if they can produce that good  at a lower opportunity cost, and we can see  clearly that they have varying opportunity costs for producing home goods.  sarah is the one with a lower opportunity cost of home goods,  which means that sarah has the comparative advantage of producing home goods.  now, the opportunity cost of the other good is just the reciprocal of home goods.  so, if sarah has a comparative advantage in home goods,  it must be the case that abe has the comparative advantage in market goods.  what we've done here in the joint production possibility frontier is we've  allowed each of them to specialize according to what they can produce best  according to their comparative advantage.  and it is the gains from these specialization.  the gains from the fact that different people have different comparative  advantage that allowed our production possibility frontier to be bowed out, and  therefore allowed us to have things that would not be possible if  we didn't get those gains from specialization. 
so this  [crosstalk]  >> alright, i  [crosstalk]  >> want to just at this moment talk about the big picture of the course.  there's three, three big picture points i want to, want to make, okay?  one is that i, what, what do i know about, why do i know something about money, okay?  my expertise as an academic, as a  professor, i've never traded the money markets.  people always say they think i'm a refugee from wall street or something.  not, well maybe i am but i've never actually been in wall street, okay so all  the learning i have is book learning okay.  but it's book learning from books like stigum  and the financial times not, not academic journals mostly.  the academic stuff that i've read, is in the history, is in,  is in the history of monetary economics and the history of financial economics.  these two books on the top here, the money interest and  the public interest, this is a history of american monetary thought.  fischer black and the revolutionary idea of finance, this is a history  of the rise of modern finance.  so, these are the intellectual foundations with which  i am approaching this subject of, of monetary economics.  and a number of the readings that we're going to have are from that.  that's why we're reading alan young, big hero of mine.  that's why we're reading badget/g, we might be reading hautry/g,  shaw, these are names that probably you haven't heard of, okay?  but you will you will learn about them, i think grow to  respect them and love them, as, as i do. that's the intellectual foundation.  but i want to really emphasize to you, this is not a course  in ancient ideas, it's not a course in the history of economic thought.  i do that, i write books about that, but  this is very much a course about the present, okay.  it's using that history, using that intellectual frame, to talk  about the world as we live in it, in it now,  okay.  and the big thing that we're trying to figure  out, everyone's trying to figure out, is financial globalization.  or global fictionalization, as sometimes people say.  every, you know, what i've learned from  reading the history of monetary thought, the history  of financial thought, is that every generation has to  figure out the world that, in front of them, okay.  the world is changing.  this is a system that is not constant, okay.  there are some idea that we can, we can bring from the past,  that we can bring from people who figured this out for their own time.  but we have to figure it out for our, for our own time.  there are new features to the system today.  it works differently. there're some eternal verities, hopefully.  it's not as if, it's not as if all of the laws  of economics have been repealed but it is a strange new world.  and as i'll s-, as i'll say later on in this lecture much of  mone, much of the money and banking  textbooks that are around, i don't use, okay?  and the reason is because these textbooks have evolved from 1950, and they haven't  changed enough, okay? in 1950 bank was a certain thing, okay?  and it is just unrecognisably changed since then.  so i'm of the opinion that what we should do is say, those were  great textbooks lets just put them in the library and lets start again, okay?  start again with something that's talking about the real  world and that means that it's a little looser, okay?  but it means that it's attached to reality  and that's the, and that's the, virtue, okay?  so that's  the second point, this course is trying to be attached  to reality, but using as our intellectual base, this historical approach.  the third thing i want to say, big picture, is that  being attached to reality means listening to the bankers, okay.  it means listening to them and trying to figure out what their world is, is like.  they don't have a big picture. for most, most of the practitioners  they know their little piece of it. you know, they're experts in repo.  they're experts in euro dollars.  they're experts in all these little arcane things and they are will tell you,  they're happy to let you buy them drinks forever, and explain the arcana of this.  but they have no sense of how the system as a whole works.  ok.  so, it really is true that an academic can bring value  here by noticing pattern, noticing this one is connected to that one.  so this is what i'm trying to do in my  life, you know with my intellectual my own intellectual resources,  is try to figure out the world, and i'm trying  to use this course to, to for that purpose as well.  that we're going to be talking about that that together and  it's not so easy listening to the bankers, you know?  we're used to courses where all you really need to know is  how to take a first derivative and set it equal to zero, okay?  and that's not going to help  you here.  we are not going to do any of that actually in this course.  this is marcia stigum's the money markets classic investment text.  all of these books by the way are at the colombia book store.  and they should all be on reserve at in the business library which i  chose because they've got lots of copies  this already which they use for their classes.  this is the desk reference that is used by people who trade the money markets.  it's a little bit out of date. they've updated the fourth edition.  they've added a chapter on euro dollars.  but it is the best thing there is and it's the bible of, of the money markets.  when i first started teaching money and banking, i don't know ten  some years ago, this was the entire text and we read through it.  there were no lecture notes, so you have it easy  [laugh],  by comparison to the guinea pigs, okay. it's who are, who are ten, ten years ago.  i would encourage you to, and you'll see on the syllabus  that i indicate particular chapters of stigum that go with particular lectures.  i think it's very helpful to read these chapters but i want to give  you a sense of the spirit in which you want to read them, okay?  think of yourself as an anthropologist.  reading the sacred text of some  tribe, maybe primitive tribe, okay? and trying to figure them out.  how they think about the world, and so forth, okay?  where, i'm not trying to teach you to trade the money markets, not at  all but we are trying to understand  this world that's really rather arcane, rather special.  and the people who live in that world are interviewed in here, okay.  so this is our, our sort of window  into this, into the operations of this strange tribe.  that's how i want you to use this book. and that can be fun.  if you try to read it to understand all the  little pieces it can get, it can blow your mind.  and if you had to trade money you would be very focused on this and all of that.  but if you're not trading money it can be kind of arcane.  so read it like that it's a sacred text of a foreign tribe.  i want to, i've also just brought a copy and, and  they're, they're, they're here if you want to sell them.  here's a copy of my book, new lombard street,  which is about the crisis but which is also  about the history of the fed for 100 years.  two of these chapters are, are, are assigned and they're just scanned in.  so you don't have to buy this book if you don't want to.  but i put some on, on the, i had the  book store collect some of them just in case you wanted  to, because it might be, an insight into what the  course is about, and but it's not, it's not required reading.  what  else. oh, i almost forgot.  we have here the financial times.  in some sense, what this course is all about is teaching you  to read the financial times, so that you can read it and translate it into english.  and in fact, there will be an exercise in doing exactly that on the final exam.  an article that you will translate  into english for your room mate.  and, so, and you will see, every day, not today, but every  day, otherwise, i will begin lecture by doing exactly that for you.  reading some article in that day's financial times.  and explaining it to you.  this is, this is the sacred text, i, i would say.  the, the ongoing sacred text of the money tribe.  the, the financial times. and if you, and everything i know, really,  that i've learned about modern money markets,  i pretty much learned from the financial times.  or they pointed me in the right direction.  so if you can learn to read the financial times.  you don't need me any more, okay. you're going to be fine.  one thing i would note just to, just to give you  an example of the kind of thing we're going to be talking about.  here on page two are a bunch of articles about the euro prices.  german banks split over ebc role.  the idea that the european central bank maybe should be buying  the debt of spain, or italy, in order  to support the prices of those, of those debts.  and this is a huge, huge controversy.  what is this controversy about? what do they even mean?  what does it mean for a central bank to be buying the debt of, of spain and italy.  this is what we, what we would, we'd be talking about.  all eyes and ears on drogy over bond proposals, so, that's about that too.  so often this page two has, has some money articles.  also, the last page of the second section, in fact today's,  there's just an incredible number of fantastic articles that are illustrations.  chinese steel mills brace for slowdown in demand.  you wouldn't think there was a monetary angle to this.  but it turns out that, in fact, the in china the inventories  of iron ore have been used as collateral for borrowing by businesses.  and the, and the banks are, are calling in these loans.  and as a consequence  they're dumping their collateral, and you having a, the  beginning of a financial crisis there being caused by this.  and so this is thing that will come to understand by the end of the course.  forex brokers back ebs plans to rein in predatory prices.  it doesn't even sound like english okay, this is about high frequency trading.  these people who, basically, they're not people.  they're computers, cyborgs, okay, algorithmic traders who are trading,  infinitesimal billionths of second stuff, and  the normal dealers, human beings, okay.  and banks are getting mad at them because they're making money at their expense.  and so there's this battle going on.  in the dealer world between the cyborgs and the human beings.  and we'll, and we'll learn about that.  yes. >> i took a class in econ history  >> yes. >> and i found out like  the economics, like they disagree with each other a lot.  so, do you, are you a believer of  any like, econ school or econ, economics school?  >> well, i, okay so the question is she's, how do  i locate myself on the, on the, in the, in the dispute between economists?  and i don't know exactly which schools you mean,  but maybe salt water and freshwater, sometimes people say.  or  [unknown]  and keynesian or something like that.  what, what i certainly identify myself with, is the money view.  but this is a word i invented.  so, it's, it's, it's my own, it's my own school.  but, but, it, i, but i definitely identify myself with  these, with this line of thinking that i was mentioning.  let me just give you some of those.  some of those names, because you'll, you'll,  you'll hear them, you'll hear them again.  so let me just erase this here, and. there's sort  of two, two lines of thinking that i very much would, when i say  what school am i, i feel like i have an intellectual ancestors, okay?  that i respect, and that i try to build on.  so that's the best answer to your question.  and the, one set of these are americans.  [noise]  okay? and they start with allen young,  because central banking started then, and he starts to think about that.  there is no tradition of central banking thinking, and then we  get a central bank, and we have to start developing it.  and so there's young, alvan hanson, this is my  first book was about young, alvan hanson, and edward shaw.  three generations of thinking about, about monetary economics.  and i would add a next one, minsky.  hyman minsky in that, in that tradition. you might have heard of hyman minsky.  some people call this financial crisis a minsky moment.  i think the second reading for the second week is going to be about minsky.  it's an article i wrote about minsky, which i think of  as the missing chapters at the end of my first book, okay?  that if you were going to continue on the story, that would  have gone, it would have gone to minsky. so i think of myself in this line, okay.  but there's another line that i'm very much i haven't written as much about it.  but there's the whole sort of uk tradition, okay.  because the uk has a very old tradition of  thinking about central banking, because they had a central  bank for a long time and they were the  centre of the world economy for a long time.  so they, it's, you can learn a lot from this old, this old literature.  and one of those people is bagehat.  another one is hawtrey. another one is  ralph sayers, who taught at the lsc/g. so these are generations.  again, we're going down.  and another one is charles goodhart whose alive today, okay,  and i would also.  this is, i think of this as the tradition of, of central banking thinking.  almost all of these people are talking to bankers.  they're talking to central bankers. they're not necessarily academics at all.  charles goodhart was an economic historian as a matter of fact.  but he, and then eventually he was teaching at the lse but he  was the chief economist of the bank of england for a long time.  that was what he did with most of his, most of his career.  sayers taught at the lse, but if  you know england it's very small.  to teach at the lse means you're a mile away from the city, okay.  it's like teaching in manhattan. you're a mile away from, from wall street.  so, you're drinking, you're drinking this milk every  day on the subway or in the taxi.  you're living, you're living in the middle of the world money markets.  and so i've learned a great deal from this, from this world.  i would say that, that some of these people call  themselves keynesians, certainly hansen you know identified with keynes.  minsky did in a certain, in a certain way as well.  some of them were more, more thought of themselves as monetarist.  shaw sort of emphasized some of that, as a matter of fact.  some people think of hawtrey as a kind of a monetarist.  i think, i see them all as  being a continuous stream of intellectual, of intellectual.  development that is keeping its eye on the real world.  on, on this, on the situation that they're living in right now,  and trying to figure it out, trying to abstract from it, and see.  so these are, these are my heroes, this is where i, where i come out.  i did learn a lot of finance, i, i learned fischer  black, but finance thinks that there's no such field as monetary economics.  okay, that fin, that they  should be finance instead of money.  okay, that in an efficient market there's  no liquidity problem, all prices, if all prices  are exactly at their efficient, efficient, efficient markets  price liquidity, there's nothing for liquidity to distort.  the story i was telling about a bank having a, having to have a fire  sale on its loans, there's no such thing as a fire sale in, in straight  ahead finance.  because all loan there's just somebody will if you just move the price  just a tiny bit below its true value, somebody will snatch it up.  so, prices aren't ever, there's not runs on banks.  and so, but that's the pure finance line.  and i learned the pure finance line.  i wrote a whole biography of fischer black, in order to  take on that most challenging point of view, to this tradition.  you know. this tradition here which  i had already identified with.  and so i jumped to the other side of the street.  and i said okay, the biggest challenge to this point of  view are people who think there should be no central banks.  there's no reason for them, okay.  obviously that's a pretty big challenge, okay.  so let me get inside that mind and understand that.  and then let me step out and write through this  course and say okay what is my answer to fisher?  what would i say to him if he were here?  and what i would say to him is what i'm going to say to you.  that's what this course is about.  this course is really, in my mind, a  dialogue between the classic central banking perspective here, okay.  and the modern finance perspective and we're trying to  find, we're, get those two ideas which seem so contradictory.  to rub up against each other and create sparks for new economic thinking,  which is this course, that's where i am.  so it's not, you're not going to hear any talks of about  keynesian versus monetarist that's really not where i'm coming from at all.  but there is a , but there is a dialogue.  there are oppositions that are creating this.  but they're not the opposition you're used to, it's the opposition of modern  finance and, and classical central banking  thinking, that's, that's what i'm all about.  i'm glad you asked that question, that's sort of, did you get a good answer?  are you, do you want a follow up at all?  >>yeah, i-i just wanted a sure like what kind  of idea or you know do you for the class.  for which? i think it's, yeah, i asked the question,  this, to, you know, for, what kind of ideas you're going  to like, talk about in the class. >> okay.  so, so she says, she wants, she's pushing me farther, okay.  so, so, where do you stand, she asks, okay.  so i, where i ultimately do stand, and i  will defend this position, for the rest of the class,  is that i do think that there is a role  for central banks, okay, in creating bounds on the system.  that it is not, that it is, that it is a version  of the role that badget had in mind in 1873.  remember, i said lend freely at a high rate against good security.  that doesn't quite work in the modern world, but there's a version.  i subtited my book, how the fed became the dealer of last resort.  this is a signal that what i'm trying to say  is we need to update bagehot for the present, okay.  that we do need central banks.  that financiers were wrong when they say that central banks are just  impositions of the state.  on perfectly functioning finance, financial markets.  i don't think financial markets work perfectly.  i think they run into problems. and, and, and banking is all about that.  and they're particularly these liquidity problems.  it's not asymmetric information, so much.  you're not going to hear that from me, okay?  it's all going to be about these particular monetary, monetary problems.  now i worry that the central  bankers, you know, who are running the world  right are, are running it a bit blind.  and i think, i read, the things i read that i find really compelling mostly  come out of the bank of england, again,  because of this long tradition of central banking.  or the bank of financial settlements, which is sort  of the banker's bank, for the, for, for the world.  and, not so  much out of academic economic publications, which are fighting old  battles and haven't grabbed onto this, in, onto this new world.  
[noise]  ft,  lead article imf warns eurozone on capital flight woes.  they're quoting the imf published report, the  global financial stability report, gfsr, for the cognesenti.  which warns that european, eurozone is a, is a  big danger to wrold financial stability at the moment.  and so here, here they are quoting that report.  delays in resolving the crisis meant that unless eurozone officials  stepped up their policy response, european banks would dump $2.8  trillion of assets, more than 7% of their balance sheets by the end of next year.  banks in the peripheray which shed just short of 16% of their assetess.  sorry maybe that's 10%. yep, 10% of their accents.  there's more to this if you look inside. there's  a loaning and groaning on the back. they quote, they actually have some some  graphs and charts here, which they say  come from the global financial stability report.  but one of them, i read it, and it didn't seem like it could possibly be right.  so i went, and i looked at the, and in fact, they mislabeled the diagram.  so, this is the thing that senior thesis  students, you know, pay attention to the details.  okay?  so these are the correct diagrams that the fte wrongly reproduces.  they get an f today. for, for for accuracy in journalsim.  and so i'll, i want to talk about some of those diagrams in a minute but  let me just tell you what's going on,  because it, there's some lessons there for banking.  [cough]  so what's going on is, is, is basiaclly this.  okay.  there's the banks in the periphery of, of  europe, and that means spain, italy, portugal, ireland.  okay.  and there's banks in the core of, of europe.  okay.  and what's going on is that people are withdrawing their deposits from, from the,  from the periphery.  they're, they're worried about those banks that they might go bankrupt.  or, or there may be a break, a part of the europe, and you,  of europe, and you wind up with the liability of the our central bank.  and you don't want that.  you want a liability of, of the, of the german central bank.  so, they're subtracting deposits here.  and adding them here.  they're moving their money from the periphery to the core.  now we know, because we did the payment system, that this  involves a movement of reserves or a borrowing back of reserves, okay?  and there is a borrowing back, there are this thing called target  two balances that are happening at the level of the central banks.  but i don't want to talk about that right now,  i want to talk about the effect on the banks themselves.  if you're losing these deposits,  okay, there's a big pressure for you to find  some other source of funding, replace them with wholesale funding.  that's not going to happen.  or to shrink something on your bal on, on this side of the balance sheet, okay?  so what they're doing, the periphery is shedding securities  shedding loans.  okay. and they're also trying to raise capital.  you can see how all three of these things,  plus capital, could absorb the, could replace the deposits.  you can see how shedding securities could replace  the deposits, because it's got to add up.  it's a balance sheet. right.  both sides have to add up.  [cough]  and what you're seeing up there in this diagram is the facts of the matter.  here.  they're saying that the leverage ratio of european banks as a whole, all of them,  okay, has gone has gone down from about 25 to 23.  the leverage ratio means total liabilities to capital.  okay? banks are pretty highly leveraged.  they typically have 3 or 4% capital, so that's  what you're looking at there.  and how did they achieve this reduction in leverage?  some of it was by capital. some of it was by selling securities.  and some of it was by getting rid of loans.  banks like this, that are doing this not only are they  selling securities, getting rid of loans, of course they're not lending.  they're not doing any new lending, right?  this, this, this is not a bank that is  serving the, the manufacturing sector or something like that.  they're, they're not about to make loans, okay?  and the core is maybe acquiring securities or something else.  here and here.  in europe it's a very what, what we, what we care about of course is not.  so, this is all europe average. okay?  this diagram, which is the one they mislabel, interestingly.  i think there's a sort of, freudian slip going on in the ft there.  this one is showing you the difference between the periphery and  the core and you see there's the periphery, the red line, okay.  euro area bank credit to the non bank private sector, so that's loans, okay.  so they're saying, you're seeing here that there's a shrinkage of credit.  in the, in the periphery.  the shrinkage. that's what we're, we're seeing here.  okay?  and meanwhile in the core it continues to grow.  but the average, which is this middle one it just seems flatten out.  so there's big differences in the core in, in,  in the periphery that are going, that are going on.  that are obscured in this sort of diagram  here okay, that averages across all european banks.  okay?  so here's, here's a, here's a, a great example  of where a little balance sheets go a long way.  that you can, you can, if you can translate what you're seeing  in the ft into this you have an understanding of what's happening.  in europe and where, and where the tensions are.  and this is a segue into this topic for today.  it also, it also refers to draghi's plan to buy sovereign debt.  it says, the ims said that the european central bank's  pledge to buy government debt, if countries agreed to reform  plans, had lowered sovereign bond yields, but said it was  too early to tell whether the scheme would relieve de-leveraging pressures.  these are the delevering pressures we're talking about.  okay.  the question is, how is it, the question that we all want to start with and  we're going to answer today, is how is it  that the central banks pledge to buy government debt?  okay, lower sovereign bond yields.  they're just promising.  they're not buying any yet.  how is that, how does that actually affect prices.  
i  want to draw your attention to an article in today's ft on page  16 in the second session called court drama puts focus on money funds.  this is a really quite an interesting article.  and it i'll read you just the opening, the hook paragraph.  which is why i chose it.  but then i'll explain it a little bit to you.  it says anyone wondering why mary schapiro, chairman of  the securities and exchange commission, has been trying to  push reform of money market funds so doggedly should  brave the stale air of courtroom 6b in manhattans  federal courthouse some time over the next couple of weeks.  you could do that, manhattan's courthouse, 6b.  this is where the fcc is reliving a moment in 2008 when the oldest money market  fund, the reserve primary fund, suffered a run  on the bank, and investors discovered it was owned,  owed money by bankrupt lehman brothers.  okay, so and it goes on to talk about the guys who a  started this fund a reserve primary fund which is a money market mutual fund  and apparently it was the first one. money market mutial fund, and it was  started in 1969, by, this guy, bruce bent, and his son, bruce bent.  and they, they started, they started this thing,  and what is a money market mutial fund?  it's a mutual fund.  we're used to maybe mutual funds, you think  of magellan as a stock mutual fund, or fidelity, or something like that.  but it's a mutual fund that holds money market assets.  so it might hold, in fact, it might hold euro dollar deposits, for example.  time deposits.  okay. it might hold commercial paper.  okay. they might hold repurchasing agreements.  in fact, might.  they do hold these things, and other kinds of  short-term money market assets and in particular the kind  of commercial paper they held was lehman commercial paper,  okay, which is unsecured short-term debt of lehman brothers here.  they hold  all this stuff, okay, and then they issue on the liability side things that  are meant to be, to look and feel as if they're bank deposit accounts.  okay?  but they're called money market mutual fund shares.  okay.  and they, so they're met, it's like a mutual fund, in the sense  that what's backing the value of the shares is the value of assets, okay.  and in a normal money mutual market fund if you're used to this.  you know, at the end of the day they,  they calculate something called net asset value, the nav.  okay? and that becomes the share price.  so the number of shares divided into the net asset value,  the market value of all of the assets, is the nav.  okay?  now, the way money market mutual funds work they have sort of some  funky accounting in order to keep the nav equal to one.  okay.  so that the shares look and feel as if they're deposit accounts.  that if you were to sell one, you would sell it for $1.  if you were to sell  two, you would sell it for $2.  you can, you can, you can treat it as if it's a deposit account.  and the way they do that is by messing with  the interest that they pay on the, on these deposits.  so that all of the fluctuation, the net asset value is  absorbed in the interest that, that's paid on, on the nav.  all of these things pay interest and where did these things come from?  they came, the market imperfection if you will.  regulatory arbitrage that this was a  response to was something called regulation q,  which forbid banks from paying interest on deposit accounts.  it's like amazing to imagine that nowadays okay, but yes it was true.  okay that, thatbanks were forbidden to pay interest on deposit accounts and  so mr. bent invented the money market mutual fund which did pay.  interest on things that were pretty much like deposit accounts, okay.  and so naturally the world beat a  path to his door and he built a whole business around this since 1969, okay.  what happened in september of 2008 however, is that this commercial paper  here suddenly became worthless, okay. when, when, when lehman.  filed, and so there was not possible to absorb the fluctuation of the  nav in terms of interest, you would have to have a negative interest rate.  okay.  and, so, and, and all the holders of these shares learned about this and said i  want my money now. okay, and there was a run on the bank.  and that meant that they had to sell stuff and.  and and, and ultimately shares were redeemed  at 98 cents on the dollar, i think.  so, it wasn't like there was a huge, like two cents of a dollar.  it was 98 cents a dollar, because they didn't hold so much lehman paper.  you know, they were diversified.  so, it wasn't as if somehow they lost all their assets.  they lost their lehma paper, okay, is what, is what they lost.  so here's what the court case is about. apparently the  [cough]  apparently the, the sec is, is claiming that the banks lied to their investors.  okay?  that they said by, by telling them that they intended to prop up  the fund with their family's cash when in fact, they had no such intention.  and bent says, it would have been impossible to do this.  this is a run on a bank.  ok? it's not a solvency thing.  it's a liquidity thing.  and i can't do that. i couldn't do it with all  of my wealth. so, there's, they're suing them.  ok?  at the, at, at the moment. in courtroom 6 b.  and you can go and, and, and have a look at that.  what happened was that the, as a consequence of this, the fed.  it wasn't the fed actually, it was the treasury,  essentially created deposit insurance for all mutual funds, okay.  in the, in the aftermath of that. there's depotit,  deposit insurance for, for regular banks of course.  and there was no deposit insurance here.  and so once the government is standing  behind these shares, you know, end of story.  the end, the, the, the run stopped right, right there.  okay.  but mary shapiro is is is on a warpath. and she's the  s, the sec, so she's concerned about this. these are, she regulates these things.  the, the securities. money market securities part here.  
[noise]  maybe you're all in mourning about vikram pandit.  okay?  who's just resigned from citibank.  >> no way. >> yeah, yeah, yeah, way.  he just resigned apparently.  the board was leaning on him a little bit, and he didn't  like being leaned on and he just quit, and he's, he's out.  he, he left the office that day.  it's over.  he's, he's, he's resigned.  and he's been replaced by a guy named michael how,  how's the, michael corbat.  who is the head, who, who built his career there in citibank holdings.  there's a nice picture here on the front page of  the ft of what happened to the stock price of citibank  [sound].  you know, while under, under vikram pandit's leadership.  of course he was brought in when  already all the problems were, were, were happening.  and they describe here hm, that he said  you know, there was this citibank was built through  all of sandy while and so fourth, hailed as  a state of the art financial supermarket since then.  it's fallen on hard times coming close to nationalization at the  depths of the financial crisis before  achieving a tentative recovery under mr. pandit.  inside on page uh,17, there are more  articles about the particular you know, misjudgments that  the board is concerned about that caused them to lean on him a little bit.  then there's a timeline of the various stages  in, in citibank's experience during the financial crisis.  what they don't put in here, interestingly i mean it starts in april 2 of 2007.  he joins citigroup.  charles prince resigns in november of 2007.  this is the fall of 2007. i was teaching this class.  okay.  and, and we were watching all of this meltdown.  and citibank in particular we were watching.  okay.  in, in the ft, they would be announcing a $5 billion loss.  and then three days would go by and they  would say, no sorry that was an $8 billion loss.  and no sorry  that was, that was $11 billion dollar loss.  and it just kept getting bigger and, and bigger.  and one thing they left off this list that i would have  included in this list, in november 2007, it was quiet a surprise.  citibank got 7.5 billion dollar capital  infusion from the abu dhabi investment authority.  and which, which staved off trouble for a  little while but then the problem kept getting worse.  this of course then led to a lawsuit when they lost all that money too.  but they were apparently left g, got to  keep the money because no one could have guessed.  but i wanted to tell you that just to, to let you know that in the fall of 2007,  some people were sufficiently convinced that this was just  a minor blip and everything was going to be okay.  that they were willing to put $7.5 billion into citibank.  okay?  professional investors from, from a, a major sovereign  wealth fund in, in, in abu dhabi, $7.5 billion.  and and, and many economists were at that time too saying oh, this is just  a sub prime thing, and sub prime isn't a very big amount of the market.  and, and so, even if it all went away, the total losses would not be very large.  and so, it was thought that it was maybe a liquidity crisis, or  some temporary loss of confidence.  this proved not to be true, this proved to be the beginning of the,  of the global financial crisis right then citibank was in the middle of it.  so i say that michael car corbat is taking over.  and he was the head of citibank holdings, which is where they put all of the  toxic assets, in order to try to manage them to, to, to do workout.  citibank was famous part of the, of the shadow banking system.  and the, they set up these off  balance sheet things called structured investment vehicles.  okay. which were structured to hold, top  [unknown]  residential mortgage backed securities, triple a.  okay?  as assets.  and then they funded themselves in using those assets as the  as the collateral in the asset backed commercial paper market.  or, or other, other sorts of, other sorts of ways.  and it's we're going to, i'm going to come back to it at the end of  this lecture about the, the first thing that happened  in this crisis was the collapse of the sivs.  collapse of this sivs and collapse of the acid back commercial paper market.  basically what happened, these were like 90 day paper.  okay?  and this is like 30 year mortgages. right?  so, come 90 days, the holders of that paper who were  money market mutual funds said, we would like not to roll  this paper.  thank you very much, we would like to be paid at this moment.  and the siv therefore had to find another source of funding, and it couldn't.  okay?  so, it borrowed from its host, which was citibank.  and that's how citibank wound up getting this on  their own balance sheet and running into all this trouble.  
i'll start today as i promised  ,uh, with the, the feature that is supposed to get students to class on  time, which is talking about today's news ,uh, using the concept of this class.  and in particular, a lot has happened since last wednesday,  i don't know if you've paid attention to this news.  you know, that mario draghi the ecb  met, and they made a very  big announcement, that they're really prepared to  support the value of the, of  the short-term debt of the peripheral countries.  and and, that's gotten some of the german  central bankers pretty upset, and that's playing itself out.  there's in today's in today's ft, financial times, on page two, there's also  a, a sort of preview of george sorros', there's, it's actually quite a provocative  title here.  it says, lead or leave currency block, sorros tells germany.  but, i'm not so much interested in the politics of  this as the economics because he has his own proposal for  what, he says the ecb is not doing enough and  we need to do more and he has his own proposal.  so what i want to just compare here quickly, last time in  last lecture i talked about the difference between liquidity and solvency, okay?  and basically what he, that's what  this is all about.  he's saying the ecb can deal with liquidity problems, but there are also  solvency problems and that's, that also needs to be, needs to be addressed.  so this is just a way of consolidating the lesson from last time, let me just show  you what i'm talking about here. the um,what mario  droggie is doing, is dealing with the- position  of bondholders who are holding short term,  peripheral, means, meaning this isn't a negative term.  meaning, meaning spain, italy, the countries that are, that in  the periphery of europe, the ones that are in trouble.  short term peripheral debt here, okay. and what,  what or investors of any kind here, these could be banks as well.  they're, and again i'm putting assets here on the left and  liabilities on the right, i'm not showing you the whole balance sheet.  the point is that this, this spreads.  the interest rates that spain and italy are  paying on their short term debt are very  much higher than the interest rates that germany  and france are paying on their short term debt.  and what the ecb has said is it's essentially going to cap  those, not officially, it hasn't said an exact cap,  but it's going to do this by basically buying this debt.  it's going to enter the market as a buyer.  what does that mean?  that means the ecb is going to buy this short term bills.  bills is the word we use for short  term debt, often and bonds usually means longer term.  it's going to buy short term bills and it's going to do it,  [sound],  initially, at least by expanding its  balance sheet by creating more money, okay?  so this is when people say, oh they're monetizing government debt,  this is, this is, this is what they have in mind.  this sort of balance sheet operation here, where  you're expanding the balance sheet on both sides.  this money is paid to these bond holders who sell that and acquire money instead.  okay?  so this is  the draggy operation and this is a liquidity operation in  the sense that they're trying to support the value of  these bills, drag down the interest rates that the, that  the peripheral countries are paying on their, on their debt, 'kay?  we're going to get into, we're going to pay a lot  of attention to operations like this in this, in this  course and there's a lot more sophistication there so  i'm just making it very simple at, at the moment.  but i want to compare that  to a solvency operation which is what, which is what george soros has in mind.  and he is focusing on, he says," let's, that's just a, that's just a, that's  buying some time, but it's not dealing with the fundamental problem," okay?  and the fundamental problem is that some of  these peripheral, countries, have way too much debt.  okay?  it's, it's not just that the prices are somehow  misaligned, okay, but one of the reasons the prices  are misaligned is because the debt to, to gdp ratio  in this country is, is just all out of whack.  and so and in particular, greater than 60%, debt to gdp greater than 60%  and so he proposes and, and since other people propose things like this as well.  i'm just taking it from, from this article here.  he proposes so they're, the bond holders are holding, and this is long term debt.  so let's call  this the excess bonds, peripheral  bonds, so this is long term  debt, of the, of, of the, of, of the periphery, okay?  and he suggests that what we should have is an efa, and what does that stand for?  the european fiscal authority, european fiscal authority, which is essentially  like the us treasury. so, the, the, it, it will be a fiscal unit  of europe as a whole, and he wants these - the efa - to buy these excess bonds.  [noise]  okay,  and to finance the purchase of these by issuing its own  short term debt, which are the  liability of europe as a whole. so that's why i call them euro bills.  bills because they're short term, euro because it's  the whole, it's all of europe, it's not individual  peripheral countries on this side.  and so, and then, he says, we should have those euro bills be the best  collateral, the ecb should except these as the best collateral in the, in the world.  so there's a monetary piece of that in, in, in part to  help the operation get going where ecd maybe buys these euro bills,  by expanding its balance sheet.  okay, and that money is what, ultimately, is  paying for this, you see, you're going to get used to this pattern of thinking.  you do this a lot in this class, where you say, you know, this and this are the  same thing, this and this are the same thing,  this minus and this plus are the same thing.  there are two sides to these transactions, and we're booking  both of them. okay.  now the whole point of this operation, he says, is that once we have bought these  excess bonds, maybe we can forgive them.  and therefore take away the excess burden on  the peripheral countries, we basically move them up  to europe as a whole instead being the debt of spain or the debt of portugal.  there the debt of, of europe.  and if we forgive them obviously the net worth, okay, of if we, if we forgive these  excess bonds the net worth over here which is  a balancing item is going to take a hit.  that's a solvency issue, okay, but the point is that europe is solvent.  okay, and portugal is not, or, or, or not as  solvent, so that's the idea, is to move this debt  to the larger entity which is solvent and  therefore take away the fundamental problem under, underneath that.  now there's a lot of politics about this.  why should we write off that debt?  you know, these are a bunch of profligate people  and we need to to im- impose austerity on them.  there, there's a lot a talk about that.  i'm just talking about the mechanics to understand what they have in mind.  you see here, there's an expansion of the money  supply as well, but what george soros says, and  it's mentioned in this article, is that this might not be the end of the story  here, because at the moment, banks all over europe okay, don't trust each other.  and so they are holding enormous quantities  of reserves, okay, at, at the ecb.  remember how last time i told you, i showed you how the fed had, like, one  and a half trillion dollars of excess reserves,  there's something like this happening at the ecb too.  and what he suggests, and of course they're getting no  interest at all on those reserve that they're holding at  the ecb, so he thinks what wh-what could happen is that these banks will trade  this money for these euro-bills.  and in doing so,  get rid, shrink back the balance sheet of the, of, of the central bank, okay.  so the point is that by dealing with the  solvency problem, you're using the balance sheet of the  ecb only temporarily to help distribute these bills and  then they wind up over here, and the money disappears.  so you haven't monetized any debt ultimately at the end of the story.  see that, you haven't monetized any debt, in fact, what  you have done is to take a lot of excess  reserves out of the system, substitute these euro bills for them.  this is the idea by focusing on the solvency issue, but  we're not there yet because there's a lot of politics there.  okay?  so we're doing this instead. okay?  it's left to the ecb basically because there  is no european financial authority, there is no  europe wide treasury, there is no europe wide  fiscal authority and this is what always happens.  when central banks do very bold things it's  because somebody else isn't doing their job, okay?  and so that's what draghi is doing.  that's what draghi is doing, he's holding the system together  and you can criticize him as much as you want, okay?  but he is, he is acting as a central banker.  and, and understanding the mechanics, what in fact these are about.  i think could help a lot with having a more seen political discussion about  what, what is it, what is at stake here, instead  of throwing around words like hyperinflation and, and, and so forth.  thinking about what are, what are the, what are the alternatives.  
[crosstalk]  today's, today's financial times, has a number of references  to the discussion that we had last time on monday.  if you might have noticed, there are several letters to the  editor and, and, and martin wolf has a column about this.  but it more or less says the same thing that we talked about on, on monday.  what's, what's new is on the, on the last  page of the market section, which is the second,  the second section of the paper, there's a headline,  feds expected q e move weighs on the dollar.  and let me just, and let me just read you the first paragraph here.  its, and says, global stocks rallied and the dollar came under  heavy selling pressure amid growing expectations that the us federal reserve  would announce a third quarter of quantitative easing, and that germany's  constitutional court would rule in favor of europe's new bailout fund.  at the time they went to  press, they didn't know the court had ruled,  in fact, in favor of the new bailout fund.  that it's, that it's legal.  so that germany's going to do its part.  there's some reservations about that but it, it, it basically went through.  so the, the issue that i want to talk about today  is, is this business about the fed's expected q e move.  q e stands for quantitative easing.  [sound]  and this is a word that is basically not in the textbooks yet.  because it was invented during the period that i'm showing in  the, in the charts up here that are, that are being projected.  this, this this chart is showing you the balance sheet of the  fed, of the federal reserve bank of the united states during the crisis.  and it starts in january  of '07 and it goes through march of 2010. so it doesn't come up to the present.  and so it's showing you the financial crisis.  [inaudible].  there aree, these two vertical lines the first one  is the collapse of bear stearns in march of '08.  and the second one is the collapse of aig and lehman brothers in september of '08.  and this is the balance sheet of the fed. up on the top, you can see assets.  so they're, they're plotted as positive numbers.  and on the bottom, liabilities of the fed.  and so i'm plotting them as negative numbers.  so it really is  a balance sheet, and you can see both sides  of the balance sheet in this, in this picture.  and you can also see time.  and, and you can see how the fed responded to the, to the crisis.  in fact the crisis began. back here.  okay.  in august of 2007.  and the first thing the fed did was to mess with interest rates.  it lowered interest rates from 5% to 2% in various stages, okay, trying to help.  okay. we talked about that  last time. right.  how the fed might try to move interest, it tried to be more elastic.  and so it's trying to help by moving interest rates.  it moved all the way down and still in march of '07.  bear stearns failed, okay, and when it failed,  a lot of other bad things started to happen.  so the fed changed its strategy, and you can sort of, you can sort of see  that in this, in this, in the, in the asset side of the balance sheet up there.  the dark blue  is treasury bills.  so, the fed before the crisis was holding treasury  bills as assets, and, and issuing currency as its liabilities.  that's what the dark blue is on the liabilities.  so, it's basically treasury bills and currency and tiny bits of other stuff.  okay, but, it's basically treasury bills and currency.  and after bear stearns, you can see they sold off the treasury bills.  and or at least half of them.  and they lent the proceeds to broker dealers and all kinds of people  try, direct lending to, to banks and to,  and to dealers to try to support financial markets.  and that worked for, and there's no change in liabilities, you can see.  that was just selling treasury bills and,  and taking the proceeds and lending them out.  okay.  but that wasn't enough. and after lehman.  and aig collapsed in september of 2008, they went even, even farther.  in order to  lend to the market they actually expanded their own  liabilities, they expanded their balance sheet on both sides.  that was the original qe.  [laugh]  qe one for someone of a certain age, like me, okay,  refers to an ocean liner, you know, the queen, the queen elizabeth.  and i think maybe it was coined by the financial times, being a british paper.  they, they have that sort of sense of humor.  but so, you can see that the fed's  balance sheet basically doubled in a matter of weeks.  and i was teaching money and banking actually during that, that semester.  that was a lot of fun.  and the and  so, the asset side is increasing and the liability side is increasing.  the first thing the fed did was to make a lot of short-term, short-term loans.  not only to domestic banks, but also to international banks.  if you see the orange thing there, central bank liquidity swaps.  that's $600 billion that was, that was lent to the european central  bank, and japanese central bank, and so forth, to help their banking systems.  because our problem was becoming a global, a global problem.  that did calm things down a little bit, and you can see  those lending facilities start to run off, about the turn of the year.  and then there's that light green thing that grows there.  that light green thing is mortgage-backed securities.  the fed started to buy mortgage-backed securities.  it bought a trillion of them. that's qe two.  when people refer to qe two, they refer to that, that's what they  mean, that the fed went into the  market and actually bought mortgage backed securities.  what the discussion is now, right, feds expected qe move weighs on the dollar.  it's, it's, it's the expectation of a possible qe three.  and what they're imagining, the fed was signaling at this,  at this meeting in jackson hole a couple of weeks ago.  some notion that the economy is softening and we have to do something.  what are we going to do?  and there was a, there was a lot of testing the waters  about, well, we need to signal that we're going to keep interest rates low  for much longer in order to keep  the long-term interest rate on, interest rate down.  so, their notion, remember i showed you the term structured of interest rates.  it's all, you know, rates are pretty much zero now, pretty low at, at,  [cough],  at the at the short end here.  and the fed is where he is trying to get that long and down a  little bit more, be even more easing an the question is how to do it, okay?  one story they say is well, if we  just tell the market that we're going to keep short  rates low for a very, very long time, then,  and they believe us, then long rates will fall.  okay.  and that's operative through the expectations theory  of the term structure, the notion that  the long rates are just the expected average, and that somehow the fed will,  the, the population will believe us if only we say it loud enough.  okay.  but another way you could try to lower these long rates is by entering into  the market and buying long bonds and in fact probably you'll wind up doing both.  but if you enter into the market and  buy long bonds, okay, you're talking about that.  okay, about printing money in order to buy long  bonds, expanding your balance sheet on, on, on both sides.  that's why the market is all kind of excited at the moment,  because if the fed is entering to buy, that's going to push up prices.  they say they want to push up prices and so that's  a capital gain for anybody who owns, who owns long bonds.  we'll see what the fed decides to do.  this, it's meeting right now and also tomorrow and the market is always  is expecting, is acting in expectation of what the fed is going to do.  so, to be, to be continued, in later, in later, in later editions.  i just wanted  to give you some of the background, some of  the language, for how to understand an article like this.  
[crosstalk]  this is been, a very, very eventful time  since we were last here, you know that, the ,uh, fomc met and  announced ,uh, quite astonishingly, bernanke said he's going to  keep, keep buying mortgage backed securities until the pain, pain goes away.  until, until employment improves this is quite astonishing for a central banker to  do, sort of unlimited support qe for the market going forward.  in retrospect we can see how he was preparing, preparing the market for that  in some of the comments that he made at jackson hole and so forth.  but it's still astonishing particularly  coming on the heels, so in one week we have mario  [unknown]  at the ecb saying.  he'll do what's, whatever's necessary, and  bernake's saying he'll do whatever's necessary.  so the central bankers are determined that they are going to use their balance  sheets to keep anything particularly bad from happening in the economy.  we can, we'll be discussing a lot in this class about you  know exactly what is the mechanism through which that's supposed to be working?  one of the interesting things in  today's ft is an op ad by one of my favorite columnists wolfgang muchaou/g.  why qe would be the right policy for europe too.  he says here, and it get it made  me aware of some features of the ecb's announcement.  that i had not been aware of before, i guess  this is probably because of the different political situation, in europe.  and the limitations on  [unknown]  .  it turns out that mario draghi said that he would  buy bonds of spain and italy if they asked him to.  okay, so they have to ask him to do this, and  that is, wolfgang is saying that, that may a problem for  leader of a country to say, oh i'm in bad trouble,  please buy my bonds is, is, is a, is a concern.  whereas if he had made a unilateral announcement that he  was going to buy them, okay, that would be another thing.  that's basically what bernanke has done.  bernanke has said, i'm going to do that.  i'm not going to wait for anybody else to ask me.  i'm just going to do it.  and so, wolfgang  [inaudible]  says that would have been the right policy for europe, too.  he's a little concerned that if, if spain and italy  don't ask, why should the price of these bonds move?  you know?  if, if the ecb doesn't actually do anything.  is it just expectations?  are we trying to change people's feelings or seomthing like that?  and he wants to emphasize, and i definately  endorse him, that that is a weak read  to depend upon. okay, expectations.  i know economists talk a lot about influencing expectations, but in  this course we're going to look at what the fed actually does.  and what the ecb actually does. what i, what, what, what we will be  thinking of both of us qe both bernanke and draghi,  we'll be, we will, in this course we don't quite  have the apparatus yet to talk about it that way, but i will be  referring to these actions as dealer of last resort actions.  in a sense that they are promising to buy these bonds at a particular price  and as a consequence no one is ever going to, going to buy them for less.  okay?  and by buying them at a high price, they lower the yield on them.  they lower the interest rate on spanish bonds.  they lower the interest rate on italian bonds in order to make this go, this  had to be a credible promise to buy, meaning they actually have to buy, okay.  and bernanke is going  to be buying.  and you will not expect to see the market any different then,  that will immediately move the price to where bernanke, what bernanke is paying.  the question is if spain and italy don't ask draghi to buy, will the price move.  to what draghi said it should be or not,  okay, and i think we will see that it won't.  it won't move there until, until draghi actually is buying and it will, it will  probably be somewhat lower, the yields will be somewhat higher.  the market reacted immediately, very optimistically thinking he was going to be  buying, but apparently there's this political obstacle in, in the way.  these are very new kinds of actions. i just want, want to underline that.  you're going to have a very interesting semester here.  central banks are doing things they've never done before.  they're, and they're say, being very bold.  they're being very bold, let's be clear, because  the fiscal authorities are not being very bold.  okay?  the fiscal authorities are all caught up in  politics, and saying, we have to have austerity.  we have to blame greece or something.  and the same as in the u.s., ok, the  republicans and the democrats can't get together on anything.  and so the central banks are trying to hold the system together.  their trying to hold the system together through election cycle, until  possibly the fiscal authorities will be able to sort things out.  this is not a job that's central  bank, any central banker ever signed up for.  that's not really what they want to be doing.  ok. but they are doing it.  and that's why i say we're in uncharted territory.  this semester.  so, stay tuned.  
start  today with the ft.  just drawing your attention to an article by martin wolf.  which is up here.  martin, martin wolf is, i believe, the economics  editor, he's a columnist, he always writes on wednesdays.  okay?  and it's always worthwhile to check out his column.  he's talking in this article, bernanke makes a historic choice.  you can see there bernanke riding the eagle with money bags  that he's dropping, i guess. the helicopter drop or eagle drop onto  the, onto the population below. and, he has a lot to say about that.  mainly he's saying that critics argue that the new  fed policy would not only fail to work as hoped,  which is likely, he, he agrees with that, but  would also do vast damage, which is far less so.  many have been prophesying hyperinflation for years.  this fear is misguided.  unconventional policies do indeed create costs and risks.  but the costs and risks of deficient demand are far greater.  the fed has decided to err on the side of expansion.  and here is the payoff quote.  it is in truth more likely to achieve too little of what it seeks than too much.  i think i would agree with that.  that it's not clear, if the problem is aggregate demand, it's  not clear how qe really translates into aggregate demand very strongly.  and so my co-blogger and i, dan neilson, we put up a  post on the money view blog just a couple of hours ago.  he wrote the one on qe3 in which he takes off from martin wolf's column.  and i put one of my little videos on there.  about the eurozone issues.  draghi and the soros plan.  you all have seen this as as what we did  in class like a week, a week and a half ago.  but i never got around to making it into a little video.  but now  it's up there. and you can, and you can check it out.  what i want to draw your attention to, and maybe i could switch over there if we had  time, but i want to draw your attention to  some of these charts and graphs that he has here.  martin wolf.  and in particular, he talks about the middle one there, which is nominal gdp and  the trend you can see there, that the he's got the trend, that's this upward thing.  and he is or, or bernanke and, and, and  mike woodford in, at jackson hole see the goal of  the fed, and, in fact, the goal of, of,  fiscal policy as well, to somehow return to that trend.  okay?  and here's the actual truth, okay. so you can we had this crisis and we're  now ticking along maybe not at trend but certainly below, below the level we want  to be and we don't seem to be catching up actually.  there seems to be a widening gap and that's what this other, this dotted line  here is in fact the ratio of the trend gdp to actual gdp.  and so it's getting worse.  we're falling, we're falling behind. part of this may be because of sort  of fiscal problems that we're not able to get our act in gear and  so a lot is being asked from the central bank, probably  too much and probably that's true in europe too as well.  
[noise].  ft today, the article that seems to be  most relevant is a, beginning of the second  section, companies and market section, there's an article  here, europe's banks race to offload property loans.  this is.  this is quite an interesting article.  from the point of view of understanding the interaction between  the banking system and the larger, and the larger financial system.  and, also the interaction between the credit system and  the real, and the real economy.  so what they are talking about here this is  in europe that there are all of these european banks.  [sound]  which have loans, property loans, on their balance sheet here.  and which are in many cases have gone south.  they're, they're not worth face value anymore.  this was part of the boom.  this is what's left over from the boom,  in spain, in ireland, wherever, wherever have you.  and they are anticipating a new round  of regulation that is going to require the banks to hold more capital against these.  against potential losses.  the idea being that if the bank raises  private capital, then the state, the government, the tax  payer will be less on the hook because  they'll be more of a capital buffer to absorb.  if these property loans go bad okay then the  capital absorbs the hit that's the idea but the regulation  is requiring these banks to raise their capital a  particularly against the most risky part of their portfolio and  so as a consequence they're, instead of going to the market  and doing this there, saying well let's keep the capital we have.  and let's just get rid of our loan so  the regulations are always a ratio, it's like capital  as a ratio to your outstanding risky loans, so  they are trying to sell all of these things.  okay, they're trying to sell these.  and what they're doing is packaging them  together, securitizing some of them if they can.  selling them at pennies on the dollar in some  cases to private equity companies, it, it indicates here.  private equity funds of some kind. so you're, they're, they're selling  these things for cash, so minus property loans and here's the  private equity, would be here and they're getting these loans minus  cash okay, plus cash here and that allows the european banks to use  some of this cash to pay down whatever borrowing they have here short  term borrowing or borrowing from the ecb or something like that.  then they're deleveraging.  this is the point. deleveraging.  okay?  meaning, they're shrinking their balance sheet  on both sides, shrinking their balance  sheet on both sides, and this is, in order to achieve these  desired capital ratios, the consequence is not only that they're selling these  property loans, probably at fire sale prices, because nobody wants to buy them.  but also that they're certainly not making any new laws okay so there's  a kind of credit crunch going on in europe as a consequence of this  as as well so this is a short little article about selling property loans  but you can see that this is really about the connection between the banking system.  and these, sort of other financial institutions.  and it's between the relationship between the banking system and the real  economy that there's a credit crunch going on here as, as well.  but since we're talking about the fed funds market today, just  draw your attention the last page of the second section, there.  there's a section  called interest rates.  market that reports on various interest rates.  the next three lectures in this course are going to be about the fed fund's market,  that's what we're doing now, and then on  wednesday we're going to do the repurchase agreement.  market.  and then next monday, we're going to do the eurodollar market.  okay?  these are the the three main dollar money markets.  and they have different interest rates associated with them.  one of our questions will be, why are  these interest rates, interest rates not the same?  but i'll just report to you what the ft says they are.  the ft reports every day what they are when it says us dollar libor  that's the euro dollar rate and this is an overnight rate and it's 0.15140.  this is overnight.  us dollar libor.  and it reports, if you go look down a  little farther, you see us overnight repo is 0.29.  okay?  and you go down a little further, and you see fed funds effective.  which is which is not the policy rate, but the actual rate  that banks are borrowing and lending to each other, and it's 0.16.  so these are, and these are all overnight  rates, these are all rates for the same period  but there are, they are not the same;  there are different rates for different kinds of borrowing.  and one interesting question, the economics of which are  always fascinating, is why are these rates what they are?  
[sound].  there's a article by john plender who's one of my favorite columnists here.  central bank firepower risks creating false sense of  security so there's some second thoughts about qe3.  and what his second thoughts are is the sort  of thing that i told you when it first  came out which what this does is to put  a floor under a certain set of security prices.  but it doesn't do anything fundamental, you know,  if the problem is a fiscal problem, it doesn't  do anything about that.  so and that's what he's basically pointing out that  the, that the central bank actions are buying time  but if you don't use that time to do  anything, okay then, then you haven't really done anything.  and he, his last his last paragraph is, is worth is, is worth having in mind.  he says, throughout history monetary experiments have  shown a nasty tendency to blow up.  i repeat,  this experiment is vast, it must not breed complacency.  i would say, words to live by right there.  and then on the opposite, so this is about  he's saying if the public authorities don't take advantage of  this window of opportunity that the central bank has  bought them there could be trouble, that's what he's saying.  on the right-hand side there's another article, hedge fund  skeptics take on the bulls over qe infinity, okay.  and this  is about whether, whether, that's, with inside the private investment world, about  how much of a kick you're going to get from qe anyway, okay.  and maybe you're not going to get very much.  there's some, some hedge funds that say, look qe1 worked pretty well.  qe2 worked a little less well.  qe3 may not work at all.  in terms of getting a bump for aggregate demand.  in terms of getting a bump even for asset prices.  and so,  and if you think that, okay, then you are in fact not a bull, you're a bear.  and you trade against the people who think that there's going to  be, that this means there's going to be a huge stock market boom.  so the, the, the stock market investors are also having  second thoughts about qe and whether this is going to do anything.  so it may, it may not even buy us very much time, is the point, okay.  it buys us time, but it buys us less time if private investors  don't believe that it's going to, that it's going to  work and they, and they trade against it.  so we will, we will, we will see is the point.  but central banks have done this not because they're  necessarily very optimistic about it having strong positive effects.  but because no one else is doing anything  and so, they're trying to hold the thing together.  and i think, today, we're going to see a symptom  in repo rates of, of of some of the stresses of the system.  that's what i'm going to argue.  
[noise]  i'm noticing in today's ft, there's one of these  full page articles they sometimes have called leaner and meaner.  where they're basically speculating about what is the future of banking,  what, what new model is going to emerge from this crisis.  given, and there's a couple of issues there.  one is that banks have learned their lessons, of  some kind or other from the from the crisis.  so they're not going to, the kind of mistakes they're going to make in the  future will be different mistakes than they made that led to this crisis.  but the other thing is the regulatory landscape which has yet to firm up.  and it's not exactly clear, and banks will be of  course, in their business models responding to that regulatory landscape.  in this regard the, i want to draw your attention to an article on page five.  [cough]  here, where it says, banks braced for proposals to ring fen, ring fence trading.  okay.  so, i want to translate some of this for you.  there's a third paragraph down.  it says, the idea draws on the uk's vicker's, vicker's commission  which last year recommended that banks retail operations should be ring fenced.  and the us vakaru limiting proprietary trading.  okay, so there is two thing there, okay that we need to understand.  ring fencing and limiting proprietary trading.  so what we are talking about here, these are proprietary  regulations that are some version of them will become law.  but it's not clear how rigorous or the exception will be so forth.  so the idea of ring fencing is this.  you'll see this word everywhere.  what it seems to mean is, what they talk about  is ring fencing the retail operations of the bank, okay?  so if you think of what a bank is.  okay.  the retail operations have both a liability side to it  and a, and a and an asset side to it.  meaning that there are retail deposits.  and there are retail, loans. now, when they mean,  when they say retail they mean loans to you and me, mortgages for example.  or household credit, credit cards, that sort of thing.  i think they typically also mean businesses.  okay, they're, because they're distinguishing not  household from business, but retail from wholesale.  okay?  so then wholesale is like borrowing in  the euro-dollar market, which we're going to  talk about today, as opposed to deposits.  or lending in the euro-dollar market, or speculation in  some kind of derivative market, or something like that.  the ring-fencing idea, is to take all of the retail loans, all of the retail  deposits, and allocate to them some of the bank's capital, dedicated to that.  and some of the bank's reserves possibly too, to that.  [cough]  and then ring fence it.  so that all the other stuff that the bank does, okay, trading assets, wholesale  borrowing, for example.  all of that activity has to have its own separate capitalization,  and its own separate reserves.  okay, so that if there's a problem on this side, if they lose a lot of money here.  the point is that that part of the bank  is somehow legally separate or it can just fail.  okay?  and this part of the bank can, can be  carved off and kept, and kept safe and separate.  that's the ring fencing idea.  okay?  whether this you know, there's a devil of course is in the details in  all, in all of these things and the details are about to be revealed.  so, that's why the what the ft is starting to pay attention.  we don't know yet what the, what the details are going to be.  the second, the second thing that we need to understand is this issue about the  volcker rule and proprietary trading,  [cough]  versus proprietary trading. the volcker rule, in  simple terms says that you can't do any proprietary trading if you are a bank.  okay?  what that means is essentially speculation, on the  direction of movement on some price or other.  what you can do okay?  it's something that is market-making  that is so-called matched book. so there's this difference between matched  book and speculation. for example,  if a client comes to you.  actually let me put it, let me put it over here  so that, because i want to put the client in there too.  okay?  so here's the bank  and here's a client,  so if a client comes to you, now this is about the trading book first of all, okay.  a client comes to you and says look i'd like i'd  like to i have some risky asset that i am holding here.  i'm a pension fund, let's say.  and i would like to sell off some of that risk.  i would like to hedge some of that risk.  i would like, a credit default swap please.  now we don't yet know in this course very  much exactly what a credit default swap is okay.  but suffice it to say that its an instrument that transfers some of the  risk of this asset to the person who's on the other side of that contract.  okay, so it's a kind of insurance.  you could think of it in that way.  it's not regulated by the laws of insurance and don't  hold, and it's not also a large numbers game like insurance.  but, but it has that quality that it allows this client to  hold a risky asset and feel they're not exposed to that risk.  that if this asset collapses, they will be paid.  and they'll be paid by the person who's on the  other side of that credit default swap which is the bank.  okay.  the volcker rule wants banks to be allowed to be in this  business, but it doesn't want the them to have naked positions like this.  it wants to say, you can do this, but then you have to find  somebody on the other side of that contract.  okay?  so you have to find some other client, here.  okay? and do an opposite trade with them.  okay?  this then is matched book, okay in the sense  that you are on both sides of the trade. you are making markets.  okay?  you are acting as a dealer in derivatives, actually.  and we're going to have a lot to say about  derivatives later, about dealers later on in this course.  in the sense that you are the  client is coming to you okay?  and you are selling them the cds that they want.  and then you are focusing on another client.  and you are, you are buying a cds from them, okay?  so you're on both sides.  so it's just like the repo dealer that we saw last time, right?  except now with the derivative and the exposure  is on the balance sheet of the bank.  this is matched book, this is allowable under the volcker rule.  what's not allowable under the volcker rule  is allowing yourself to be exposed one way or another saying.  you know what, i think those risky assets are actually going to fail.  okay?  and if they're really going to fail, if i think they're really  going to go bad, then i want to myself bet against them.  and the way i do that would be finding more people.  okay?  to you know, i want to, i want to, i want to buy insurance.  so that when they fail i get paid.  okay?  and this, this is taking a proprietary trading position.  okay?  this is betting against those assets. this is not betting against.  or rather here's a bet in favor of the assets and here's a bet against.  and you're matched. both ways, okay?  so whatever happens to the assets, you're, you're not exposed to the price.  you're, of course, selling these things at a lower  price than you're buying, buying them, so there's a spread.  that's what's you're, that's what you're making money on.  so this thing, that is outlawed, okay, by the volcker rule.  yes?  >>  [inaudible]  >> your market maker has to have cds on both sides.  can you offset cds with different instrument?  >> yes, yes.  um,so the question is, do these have to  be exactly the same instruments on both sides?  well what you, what you want if your having matched book  is that you have exactly the same risk exposure on both sides.  now that doesn't necessarily require exactly the same instrument, okay.  because there are a lot of different ways to  skin a cat and the and the banks know that.  and so there's a lot of, a lot of finances about that.  now, there's also a lot of things that are almost like a cds and so the questions is.  if you hedge with something that's sort of correlated but not exactly one for one,  that exposes you to so called basis risk. is that proprietary trading?  >>  [cough]  >> no, maybe yes, maybe no.  and if you outlaw that, then you make it very difficult for the bank to hedge.  and if it, the bank can't hedge, they can't do this trade in the first place.  so, so, that's why i say that the devil is in the, is in the details.  
okay. so, let's get started.  i want to draw your attention to an article  that was in, that was in today's financial times  about iran. on, on page on  page 3, iran uses force to  strengthen rial. they're, they're talking about how  the rial has been depreciating very dramatically in the last week or two.  in tehran's bazaar, where there are all theses  currency dealers private currency dears against the dollar.  and the government has just stepped in just today.  it's reported, and is buying $1 u s for 28000 rials.  so, $1 equals 28,000 rials,  and that's the, that's the government rate.  and they report that meanwhile on  the black market, illegally  uk $1 is 30, 000 rials.  [cough]  which is 6%, 6% depreciated, because it takes more rials to buy a dollar.  of course, not a lotta people are going in with dollars and wanting to buy rials.  the problem is the other.  okay?  that people have rials, and they want to buy dollars, and  so they have to give more and more and more.  what's interesting about this is two things.  one is, this introduces the idea of a foreign exchange dealer.  okay?  and today, we're beginning the section of the course that's  about understanding banks as dealers.  we're not going to do foreign exchange until after until after the  midterm, but at least we are introducing this idea here now.  and the second thing is that they make very  explicit in the in the, in the article here.  that the reason for this dramatic depreciation of the rial is the various  banking sanctions that have been imposed by the west on the payment system.  okay.  that there's  been an attempt to isolate iran and keep it out of the  world payment system, so that they can't get any dollars, is the point.  and and because they can't get any dollars,  the, the deprecate, the depreciation of the rail.  it says, sanctions have not only caused iran's oil revenue to  shrink, but have also made it difficult for tehran to receive payments.  which we'd say, which would be dollar, because it's a dollar world system.  which are plagued by long delays and high fees.  there's some suggestion that maybe this is all engineered by amedinajad's opponents.  but they, but the ft says, no palace plot can explain the staggering  depreciation of the real in this consequent  flationary spiral that iran has fallen into.  the eu's oil sanctions have opened a hole at the heart  of the iranian economy, which is over reliant on crude exports.  meanwhile,  and this is the point more for this course.  meanwhile the u.s. financial sanc, sanctions are making it slow  and expensive for tehran to receive payments for its exports.  investors who expect the economic outlook to worsen are staying clear of the rial.  citizens are also dumping their plummeting currency, taking shelter in foreign notes.  okay.  so, you have everyone trying to sell rials and buy  dollars, and the consequence is the falling price of the rial.  more and more rials for, for fewer and fewer dollars.  
i want to walk you through the syllabus a little bit.  but usually at this point the question arises about prerequisites and maths.  yeah? okay.  the prerequisites for this course are, intermediate macroeconomics,  and intermediate microeconomics, that's for the economics majors.  okay?  if you're an economics major, and you want to get major  credit for this course you have to have had those prerequisites beforehand.  okay?  we don't make much use of those, but let me just talk about, but we could.  and in other money and banking classes, they do.  they start immediately from that.  and at the end of the class, i will be  connecting it up, to the, to the stuff that you know.  so when i say, intermediate macro, and intermediate micro.  let me explain what i mean by that.  because usually some students here are even from  history or from, or from law or something and  they haven't taken these courses and so they're worried.  okay?  about these prerequisites. when i say intermediate macro i mean  this.  [sound].  okay? intermediate macro.  this is a story about the determination of national income.  and the determination of the rate of interest, and nominal rate of interest.  and we're used to thinking about monetary policy as shifting around the lm curve.  and you could build a whole course around that.  the foundations of the lm curve. said policy, the taylor rule, you might  argue that this lm course should be horizontal.  and that it's, it's a and your trying to do inflation targeting maybe or something.  we'll talk about all of those things. okay?  but we're not really going to be starting from  here, and building the foundations of the lm curve.  in fact the whole, we'll be questioning the  whole concept of a stable money demand curve.  or a money supply curve, you know, so it's actually at a much more fundamental level.  that were, that were operating.  so this is intermediate macro. and you will have seen that before.  intermediate micro is another diagram. this is economics.  right?  consumption, this period, consumption next period.  and we have some kind of production possibility frontier that shows  with the resources how we can produce this and produce that.  and, we have a  [sound]  tangent budget line here. and the slope of that line is minus  one over one plus r. the, the real interest rate, in this case.  and we think of there being.  different kinds of human beings in this world.  [sound]  type one and type two where they are maximizing their utility.  okay, there's a first order of condition for you.  right? and creating a tangency.  and choosing given they're, we imagine they both start with the  same wealth, they have the same production possibilities, and then they trade.  and this person says they want to consume more  in period one than they're producing in period one.  and this person says,  okay, they want to consume less in period one than  they're producing in period one, and more in period two.  okay?  so this is person is borrowing, and  this person is lending if we bring money into this story.  okay, there's this notion that what are financial markets doing?  they're allowing people to do inter-temporal trading in  some way between people who want to consume more  today and people who want to consume more tomorrow  and there's an interest rate that clears that market.  this is intermediate micro. this is general equilibrium.  this is a story about the determination of the real rate of interest.  okay?  and sometimes this is called the fisher diagram after irving fisher.  and you could build a whole money banking class around this and people do.  okay?  thinking of banks, and maybe there's some imperfection that keeps these  people from, from meeting each other,  asymmetric information or something like that.  and banks or  credit markets are sort of in between trying to facilitate this flow.  of savings to investment and so forth, and theory of intermediation.  you could build a whole theory of money and banking around this.  and there are textbooks that, that do that.  okay?  that's not what i'm doing in this class. okay?  we will come back to both of these points of view and  connect up what we've learned to both of these points of view.  but we're actually not starting.  from a set of economic apparatus and  thinking, how can we apply this to banking?  no, we're starting at the other side,  you know, let's start from that concrete realities  of banking and try to inductively draw from  that some notion of how this thing works.  what are its regularities?  what kind of theoretical things can we say about it?  without imposing this structure right away.  that's, that's the, the strategy.  so, what is the analytical apparatus that we use in this class?  i've been teaching this class for a long time, i may just tell you  that the first two weeks of this  you're going to experience as a little disorienting.  okay?  but then it will start to come together and everyone at the end feels fine.  okay?  so it's just  [inaudible]  and the reason it's disorienting is because you're used to grabbing onto that.  okay?  or grabbing onto that and saying oh yeah, i know where  i am you know i recognize this from the past course.  and there's not going to be stuff like that.  you know the very first stuff that you start reading is going to be things  that are unfamiliar to you, and so, that's just the way it's going to be.  i sometimes tell students it's really fortunate  that many of you had an experience  as a, first year student or a  second year student, you know, saying, here's nietzsche,  just read nietzsche and we'll talk about it tomorrow,you know, or something.  so you, you, you, students rely on that background,  that, that they, they know how to do that.  that's okay.  don't worry about it. it'll eventually make sense to you.  read it.  do your best and it will eventually come together.  just trust.  it always does.  and there is an intellectual tradition here  with great care, great, great minds that  are trying to figure this stuff out. and that's what we're trying to access.  we're trying to think, what i always do when  i'm reading the financial times, i say to myself.  you know, what would bagehot's make of all of this?  or what would minsky make of all of this?  or what would fisher black make of all of this?  these are people i've written biographies of.  right?  so i can enter their minds and say what would they make of this.  okay?  that's how i think about the world always is by just shifting,  shifting gears back, back and forth.  that's what i bring to the table, so i guess my answer is  that i'm a, i'm a, i'm a member of my own little school.  but i don't feel alone, at all, i don't feel alone at all, because  there's this, there have all these ancestors  here, and they're, they're pretty great guys, actually.  monetary economics is all about books, because it's so big.  you can't really, you gotta write a treatise if  you're really going to get anywhere in, in, in monetary economics.  that's what i loved about it. that's why i chose monetary economics.  i went down to the library.  i saw that shelf of those books.  and i said, if i could have a life reading all of those  books, just from left to right, that would be the best life ever.  and that's the life i've had.  [blank_audio]  .  
talking about the economics of the dealer function.  let me begin by saying, well, what exactly are we talking about here?  we're talking about, today, is the provision of so called market liquidity.  we say a market. as opposed to funding liquidity.  funding liquidity is the ability to raise money when, to replace funds.  the exact sort of thing that the periphery banks have no ability to do.  when they lose deposits, they can't raise funds.  their problem is funding liquidity.  market liquidity is, the ability to, buy or sell.  buy or sell, quickly,  [cough]  in volume without moving the price.  [cough]  we say that an asset is, is a liquid asset if you can buy  a lot of it, and the price doesn't move or doesn't move very much.  or, and if you can sell a lot of it and the price doesn't move very much.  okay.  assets are, some assets are more liquid than others, and you can, you can, you can  tell by seeing how much you move the price, if you're, if you're leaning on it.  [cough]  this is market liquidity, it has to do  with, with, with individual markets for individual assets, okay.  what we want to talk about today, is where does market liquidity come from.  it comes from dealers as we'll say, as we'll see.  when we think about market liquidity another, another way to connect  this to what it is that, that, that hicks talks about.  is to say, well in a way a liquid market is a market with a continuous price.  the price might be fluctuating, okay, but there's no hops.  there's no air pockets.  you know, it moves, it might fluctuate around but it's a continuous price.  an illiquid market, is one where there might be a few trades and then a few  more trades and then a few more trades. and there are these like  discontinuous prices.  so there's this thing about, sort of time continuity and  time that prices, prices move a little bit at a time.  they might move a lot in a short period of time but in any sort of segment of  time they're, they're kind of continuous and so we're  trying to understand today what, what is the market structure.  that gives rise to that, okay.  there is nothing in supply and demand, right.  you are used to in micro, right, supply shifts,  the price shifts.  okay, so we don't, we don't talk in typical  micro economic classes about the market structure underlying these markets.  what's going on that, that, that.  we, we, we just treat it as if the price moves from one equilibrium to another.  okay.  and that's an abstraction from some institutions in the economy.  those institutions are the dealer institutions that  we're going to focus on, focus on today.  now, we're all, we don't know much,  we don't have much intuition about security dealers.  because we aren't security dealers.  but we have intuition about a certain kind of dealer.  a supermarket.  okay?  so let's start our intuition with the west side supermarket.  when i walk into work.  i pass by the west side market, and there's  nobody in there, because i come in really early,  okay? there's no, there's nobody in there.  it's stocked, the, the shelves are full, there's nobody in there.  and, every evening when i walk home, it seems  like all of new york is in there, okay?  and, it's totally crowded, and the shelves are seriously depleted, okay?  now, if you go in that market, okay? what you notice is.  the prices are the same in the morning and in the evening.  it's very clear that supply and  demand are not lined up in time, there's a lot of supply  and not much demand in the morning, and yet prices don't fall.  there's a lot of demand and not much supply in the evening.  and yet prices don't rise.  you know, what's going on there? maybe they're just being lazy.  you know?  could they, could they, could they make money if they moved these prices around?  we could ask that.  i think it's more, more important for our purposes  is to say, well how do they achieve that?  how do they, what are they doing that allows price to  be continuous over time, even though demand and supply are fluctuating?  or, supply is constant, sort of, and demand is fluctuating?  how do they do that?  they do that, the secret is inventories. right?  when i said, the shelves, right?  they've got a bunch of stuff on the shelves.  okay? that absorbs the  flow of demand.  so in the morning, there's no demand, then there's a lot of stuff on the shelves.  and then as demand comes, the shelves get  depleted and then at night, they restock them.  now this is manhattan, so they don't  actually have goods in the basement anywhere.  okay.  they're bringing them in from jersey.  okay.  so there are other inventories in the system.  that's the other point.  there's inventories in jersey. okay.  at, that are, that are, that are available, and they, that's where  the main wholesale market for a lot of vegetables and stuff is.  and, and, they, they have restocking from the farms and everything.  so there's this whole, dare i say, hierarchy of inventories that is lying  behind the ability of westside market, okay, to make liquid markets in mangoes.  okay. so the secret is inventories.  westside market is a liquid market. it's a one sided market.  they are not making, they are not offering to buy mangoes from me.  they are not.  if you walk in there with a box of mangoes.  they'll ask you if you stole it.  okay. so they want to sell you mangoes.  but they are definitely buying mangoes.  they are just buying them from jersey or from, somewhere else.  so they're, what we call a one sided dealer.  the whole sale,  they are buying whole sale and they are selling retail.  okay, there is a kind of security dealer that does this  too, when we do an initial public offering or something like that.  for, a, for a, of, of a security, an  investment bank acts as a one sided dealer, meaning,  they buy the whole thing, or they promise to  buy the whole thing, and then they distribute it.  and so, they, they are buying it wholesale and they are distributing it retail.  and so they might have a lot of it on their balance  sheet at any moment because they haven't distributed it yet,  you know, that's a one sided a one sided dealer.  so we can start to build inventories start to build intuition  with this particular, with this intuition we have about supermarkets.  
last time as you'll recall, we, we i  introduced the dealer model here, trainer dealer's model.  and we were thinking about it as a model of a dealer who  is, is a security dealer is, is trading bonds, stocks and bonds stock.  but bonds. and moving the price that he quotes, the  bid ask spread here depending on his position, his inventory as we said,  okay?  and we talked about what that, what that dealer does, and, and how he  sort of converts funding liquidity, which he  uses to finance his inventories into market liquidity.  our ability to buy or sell quickly without moving  the price and volume really depends on agents like  this, profit seeking agents, who are willing to take  the opposite side of that trade for a price, okay?  and the price  is the diviation of the price they are quoting from any fundamental value.  that is what it costs us in order to have equity, okay?  that's, that's the point of yesterday's lecture.  now, the next step in the class, okay?  these are security dealers, right?  and so they're sort of, in, in my  concept of the hierarchy of money and credit, okay?  they're pretty far down,  okay?  it doesn't mean their social status or anything.  just that they're, they're pretty far removed from the best  money in the world, international reserves or something like that, okay?  so we want to ascend the hierarchy now and start talking about banks.  and so let me just first to motivate today, okay?  give you a puzzle.  when we're talking about banks typically i mean in, in, in when i talked  about the, the hierarchy of money and credit.  i said we're going to talk about banks as making  markets between two layers of the hierarchy if you remember.  between currencies and deposits, okay?  and the price that's relevant between these two things is par, okay?  a price of one. currency and deposits trade one for one.  this might remind you a little of a  money market mutual fund issue that i just raised.  so this is a little different than the security markets, right?  you know, if, if, you're making markets, you can't move the price.  you know, if you're making this kind of market, you, you, can't move the price.  and we emphasized how it was very important for the dealer to  be able to move the price in order to shelter themselves from risk.  that the, that somebody on the other side might know more  than them or if there's price fluctuation or something like that.  so it's, it's there's two puzzles here.  one is how can they possibly make a market without moving the price.  with, with, without being able to change the price.  how's it even possible? and how's it even profitable?  you know, why would anyone do this, okay?  since again we're emphasizing the profit seeking dealers our whole model.  so if you think about the difference between the, this  bank american banking thing and what we have up here.  you say to yourself,  well first of all we have a fixed price of one here, okay?  they can't really change depending on the inventory, that's the whole point, okay?  not only that, there's no bid-ask spread, right?  you have to be able to move from the  currency into depositing, depositing the currency at the same price.  there's, so,  so, there's a big difference, it seems, between banks  and this model because there's no bid as spread.  and the price by, by, by design, okay, is, is fixed.  okay. so this is the puzzle.  how can we use this model? ' kay.  when you, one of the life lessons i have doing  economics for long time is when you confront a puzzle  like this it's better not to hit it head-on.  because it just means there is, there  is too many, there's too many intervening steps.  okay.  so let's just back up. okay.  and we'll come to this. okay.  let's back up.  let's back up and let's think about our security dealers first, okay?  [blank_audio]  
something for today, is, i, i titled the lecture lender slash dealer of last  resort. and, it's mostly about, lender of last  resort really, but, but in a way, dealer of last resort in the money market, okay.  when we talk about dealer of the last resort in the capital market well, we  have to wait until after the midterm,  when we introduce derivatives and things like that.  okay?  so, but this is, this is beginning to, to see,  how the role, the role of the central bank,  the role of the fed in times of crisis.  and how it basically saved, not only the u.s. banking  system, but the global funding system during, during this crisis.  how did they do it?  why did they do it? and, and, and all of that.  so i'm taking, i, i brought you here just to as, and for maybe as a  little source of inspiration for myself, one of  the great books in the history of monetary economics.  this is a collection of, of essays by  ralph hawtrey called the art of central banking.  the art of central banking.  eh, published in 1932 in, in london.  an auspicious year.  and in there, chapter four, is the art of  central banking, is the, is the, is the title.  and the very first sentence of this chapter is, is,  well there's it's titled, the subtitle, the lender of last resort,  a central bank is a banker's bank.  the central bank is a lender of last resort.  he refers to bagehot, he talks about the london discount market.  this, this chapter was quite inspirational for me as i was trying  to figure out how to think about, think about, think about banking.  hawtry is one of the greats in the, in the history of, of british monetary thought,  in the line of baggett, and then up, up, up through keynes and sears, and  goodheart the art of central banking. and my copy actually was a used copy that  was withdrawn from the kirkland house library at harvard, and i paid $3 for it.  so i'm, i'm showing, just as also further  inspiration, i'm showing oh, i left my laser pointer.  i'm showing here the various lending facilities of the fed,  during the, right now, that are open. and, this is a list of  all of the borrowing, borrowing, forms of lending at the fed right now.  it's from the new york fed's, website, and i, and  i put, the url here on these lecture notes here.  regular open market operations, so we've talked about those.  discount window, we've talked about those.  and then you get this whole long list of other stuff, okay?  that was basically not on the balance sheet before the crisis.  it came on the balance sheet as part of  the response to the crisis, and it's still there.  okay.  and they talk about what each one is supposed to do.  so you have their term discount window programs,  so this is term lending, not short-term lending.  term auction facility, primary dealer credit facility.  this is like  lending to dealers.  transitional credit extensions, reciprocal currency arrangements  these are those famous liquidity swaps.  securities lending, term securities lending facility,  abcp market fund liquidity facility commercial paper  funding facility, money marketing investing funding  facility term, term assets securities loan facility.  all the stuff okay was the  fed's response to the crisis.  this is what put a floor under it, so we want  to get to the point where we understand what those things did.  and that's what we'll get to by the end of today.  
jump right in to lecture 2, which i call the natural hierarchy of money.  this is a, a big lecture.  this is the big picture of the whole course, basically.  the whole course is right here in this lecture.  this lecture is going to be online, it's going to be posted in course works.  and you won't really get all of it, okay? right now.  but you will by the end of the course.  and you will go back and read it and say "yes, in fact, he is right, that was the  whole course!", okay?  why do i do that?u why do i feed you  with this fire hose right here at the very beginning?  it's because i've discovered over time that what  makes this subject matter difficult is that people  have certain patterns of thought that they've acquired  partly just by living in the world as consumers.  but partly by taking economics classes, okay.  and some of these patterns of thought stand in the way.  they, they and you have to put them aside and think in a different way.  one of the things that, that, that  economic students, particularly good economic students find most  difficult is this idea about expanding both sides  of the balance sheet at the same time.  it seems like a free lunch and we're just  like told there's no such thing as a free lunch.  it's very, it, it, it's jarring, okay? mentally.  for good economics  student to kind of understand how these operations work.  the alchemy of banking, creating something from nothing.  it seems, it must be wrong.  okay?  so i'm putting it right up front at the beginning so that you see it.  okay?  and i'm not hiding it, so that,  you address that un, underlying psychological unease.  right here at the beginning.  another issue is people are so used to  thinking of money as a positive number that  seeing it, you know, as a liability of this central bank,  okay, on the liabilities is, is all like just very difficult.  this is about understanding of between outside money  and inside money which we're going to be talking about.  that's another problem.  we're also very used to thinking of money as a creature of the nation-state.  okay, and today i'm not going to really talk about the nation-state at all,  we're going to think of the central bank as a bank, as a bankers' bank.  and,  and only tomorrow, only on wednesday will  we bring in the nation-state, and finally and  that, that this sort of obstacle, psychological obstacle,  it gives me the title of the lecture.  we're so used, you know, in economics to thinking about  supply and demand and genearl equilibrium and thinking of end goods.  there's all these different goods.  and there's a relative prices between them that are moving around.  so we think of all these goods  as in some sense at the same level.  and if you start to think of  all the different monitored instruments as being at  the same level with prices clearing, you will not really get how the system works.  so i'm emphasizing that it's  [inaudible]  they are not at the same level.  they only appear to be at the same level and when crisis  happens and you find out that they aren't at the same level.  the things that look like they were equivalent in fact, are not structural.  so, this i'm bringing right into the center of our consciousness,  because it's one of the most challenging ideas for people to get.  now, while that's why, in this course, often  people who don't have economics backgrounds do better, okay?  at first, because they're not overcoming  these, they, they just said, oh, okay, that's fine.  they don't, they're not trying to be economists, okay.  we can come back at the end, nothing that i'm saying  is actually in contradiction to any of the economics that you know.  okay?  but, but it requires you to, at least at the moment, to spend your impulses.  okay?  in order to accept a kind of weird and new way of  thinking about the world, and we'll integrate it in at the end.  so that's all just by way of warning. so the very sentence,  always and everywhere monetary systems are hierarchical.  and what i want to start with this idea of hierarchy is the difference between  money and credit.  money is better than credit okay.  it doesn't just cost more or something it's qualitative better.  credit is a promise to payment.  money is money.  money is the thing that eliminates debts, the  money that that debts are are canceled in.  okay, everyone knows that, okay.  but the significance of that is often underestimated.  this is the place to begin. all textbooks talk about  money and credit like that.  i'm going to, in order to really emphasize the  hierarchy, i'm going to add a few more layers.  okay?  four layers, in order to show, and there are many more layers than that.  just to really build this idea of hierarchy.  let me get myself some more room here.  [sound].  and i'm going to think about a world where the  ultimate money is not problematic at all, it's gold.  okay.  you, you all probably know that at one point there was a gold standard.  and some people think of that moment with nostalgia and some people  think of it as a sort of archaic system that we pass through.  we'll have those discussions later on.  this is, this is going to help us think about the hierarchy  at the moment because it's pretty clear in  the gold standard what is the ultimate money.  so let's start with gold  as the ultimate money. okay?  underneath gold, less good than gold, is national currencies.  currencies are promises to pay gold, in the sense that, there, there's a  mint standard, there's a mint par /g, and the central bank of the country.  is, is meant to clear, international accounts  in the ultimate money, in, in, in gold.  so there's national currency that's  the liability of a, of a central bank. we'll come to that in a minute.  underneath that, are bank deposits.  these are private banks, that are, are issuing deposits.  deposits are promises to pay currency.  not promises to pay gold but, so ultimately their promise is to  pay gold because if you get currency, you can turn it into gold.  so, and then underneath deposits are all other kinds of credit.  so we'll just call them securities  but it could also be loans of various kinds.  here.  well, that's clearly credit, you know.  this is a, these are promises to pay and this is money, okay.  when we say money loosely, okay, where do we draw the line between money and credit?  in most textbooks you talk about money and credit you don't talk about  four layers. where did they draw the line?  okay?  well, there are different throughout time this is sort of changed.  through, throughout history, one idea is maybe draw it here.  okay?  saying that all this stuff is money and all this stuff is credit.  certainly that is a 19th century view.  people often, often did that, because banks which  are issuing deposits are clearing those payments with currency.  with,  with national currency there and so that's the ultimate payment domestically.  so if you take a banking point of view, okay take the point of  view of a bank, maybe this stuff is money and this stuff is credit.  but if you, your, if you've had any well, introductory economics  or something, you'll have heard of m2 and m3 and so fort.  and there, you take the point of view of the consumer  or the, or the business which is generally doing business with these  deposit accounts here.  and thinking of money as everything above  here, okay, and credit as everything below here.  and if you've taken a course in  international monetary economics, okay, you will know that  it does you no good at all in  paying international payments, to have your own currency.  you have to have the international currency, okay, so money is  everything above this line, and credit is everything below this line.  okay, so, what lesson do we take from this?  what counts as money, and what counts as credit depends on the situation.  and it depends on who you are, and it  depends on the layer of hierarchy you're talking about, okay?  so instead of starting with definitions, this thing is money, this thing is credit.  we're starting with concepts, okay?  so that we, in, in, in any individual situation,  we ask ourselves, okay, what layer are we at?  okay?  what things are credit, what things are money, at this,  in this, in this layer that we're, that we're talking about.  okay?  so, there's a hierarchy. i've indicated here, four layers.  there are, in fact many more than that, and there's considerable  differentiation within each of these layers, and we'll, we'll talk about that.  so,  once you get used to thinking about a hierarchy, you'll see it everywhere.  okay.  it'll become, it'll become obvious. that's the main point for, for today.  so far, so good? this is a hierarchy of financial  instruments. financial instruments.  
i'm inspired.  this lecture is really inspired by the reading  for this week, this reading by allen young.  how many of you have had a look at this yet?  okay, good, good.  i hope you found it easy, easy enough reading.  it's an, it's an encyclopedia entry, so there's no math.  there's a lot of sort of history and institutions and it's  quite wild and wooly story, right, about amer, american monetary history  it's, it, it's very difficult, in fact,  to disentangle all the different, all the different  pieces and and i'm going to try to start  doing that a little bit in today's lecture.  but what i want to alert you to as you're reading it, is alan young's own you know?  where, where his head was.  he's writing this in 1924, okay?  so this is after world war, after world war i.  he was  john maynard keynes counterpart at versailles.  during the post war agreement about who pays what.  so he was the stats man. he was the economist there.  and not at all a famous man, like, like, like keynes.  but very much a contemporary of, of keynes.  a much quieter personality.  he i, i, if you read this article carefully you will note that he  is taking positions on quite a number  of important controversial issues in monetary economics.  now you wouldn't know what those positions are, because you don't know the literature  that he's reacting to, and he's not  footnoting it, because it's an encyclopedia entry.  right.  so so let me just give you a hint about some of  the things to look for as you're, as you're looking through here.  one of the things  he is doing is, is, he is going against economic orthodoxy.  in 3 dimensions.  the first one is this discussion that he starts off with of barter.  the notion that money is just there, we  just use money because of the inconvenience of barter.  okay.  this is a very old trope in, in economics.  it actually was jevons and he wants to say no.  okay, money has always been there, ever, ever since trade, it's very  fundamental, it's built, it's baked into the cake.  it's not something, there was never a period when  people were trading goods for goods, there was always money.  it's, it's much more fundamental than economists are accepting.  he's also saying that money is key for, is key for growth.  i think in the second chapter you're reading, that you can't imagine the  successful economy, or a, a developing economy,  gr-, a successful depends on a proper  financial system.  and that if you don't have a proper  financial system, you're not going to be able to grow.  here again, this is against economic orthodoxy of his time,  and to, to some extent, e-, economic orthodoxy of our time.  i mean, if you took growth theory the solo growth model right?  what, what causes growth?  okay, there's productivity change, there's  capital accumulation, there's, there's population growth.  where is there the financial system?  it's like in fact there isn't any money, there isn't any finance.  there's nothing like that in that, in that, in that model.  and the technology, technological change, is a  residual, so any growth that was actually due  to financial, financial things is just dropped into  that residual and attributed to tech, technological change.  so, so this is still the case, that most economists.  have a kind of bias toward the real side, you know, they tend to think of  money as sort of a veil that we should look through to see the real stuff  underneath, you know, productivity and so forth.  and, and, and young is saying, no, no, not at  all, okay, this is the fundamental factor in, in economic activity.  and, and so that's against economic "orthodoxy".  the third thing, that he mentions, is the currency principle.  i mentioned that last time, the currency principle.  this idea that, the, the principle of scarcity, okay?  that is, a lot, most economists i would say had  the idea that money gets its value from its scarcity.  because that's the general theory of value that in,  in neoclassical economics that's what, where value comes from.  it's scarcity relevant to demand.  and so, they're always worried that these little green pieces of paper are  going to lose their value, if they're over issued.  if supply exceeds demand, they're just going to fall in price.  and you're going to have hyperinflation or something like that.  so, the currency principle eh, the scarcity  principle is very much embedded in, in  the way economists think about money as  being quite important for sustaining its value.  he's, he has a big critique of the currency principle.  right?  he says that the national banking system was  created on the basis of the currency principle.  they wanted to limit the money issue and they wanted to limit the deposit issue.  as a consequence, there wasn't sufficient elasticity.  and it caused periodic financial crises.  so, he's a critic of the currency principle.  and he's saying there has to be more elasticity in the system.  and the fed arose to give that elasticity.  so, the, these, he's he, he, he writes very smoothly, and  so you would never know that he's taking positions that are actually.  relatively controversial,  as a matter of fact, by your average economist.  now he was not your average economist.  he was professor of monetary economics at harvard university, and he  was the adviser to benjamin strong with the new york fed.  okay.  but he was certainly in the minority, so he might have been important, but this  was not at all the standard way  of understanding money, and it's not today either.  okay.  i think it's always a minority position, but its not  a minority position inside central banks, and by people who,  who, who are, are, are dealing with money for a living.  these are, so these are 3-dimensions that  you'll see where he's engaging with the economists.  there are 3 other dimensions of this.  where he's engaging more with the outside world.  and with what, what the, the opinions that the average person might, might be having.  one is, he's opposed  to what we call today the chartalists.  i don't think he calls them the chartalists.  okay?  but this notion that the reason that these dollar bills have value.  okay?  is because of the power or the state or the, the state stamp of certification  [inaudible]  or something.  that this is some kind of, of, that the state asserts through its legal system.  this is legal tender and that establishes us.  the le, the legal system establishes the value of that dollar.  okay.  he says, actually, no, okay, that he has quite a paragraph or 2 there, where  he says, there's a theory about this but it just doesn't make any sense, okay.  so, he is, that's, that's about the power of the state.  as the origin of the value of money.  another group that he is trying to  differentiate himself from is is finance as well.  so he's, he's saying he's definitely not an efficient markets guy.  there, all along the side, you, you hear him  pointing out how the inefficiency of the way the  monetary system works under the national banking system, caused  asset prices to go up and down and their crashing.  so their asset prices are fluctuating quite apart from fundamental values okay.  so their not, its, he's not an efficient markets person saying that asset prices.  are, are always the correct level.  he's opposed to speculation.  he says that speculative bubbles are a problem for, for, for capitalism, and that  there, there needs to be some engagement of public policy to control that.  so he's,  he's, he's putting himself on the side against the speculators.  and perhaps most of all, for the time he's writing, populists.  okay.  he's on the side of the federal reserve against those who see  it as a big behemoth central bank that's come to control our lives.  okay.  he thinks we need a central bank, and he's trying to explain  here why it's a good thing. why, where it came from.  it was a response to real problems in, in, in the economy.  it's a good thing.  he, a populist in particular, you'll,  you'll see he mentions william jennings bryan.  1896, thou shalt not crucify on this cross of gold.  famous speech from the democratic convention.  and, and young is very much in favor of returning to the gold standard.  okay?  so he wants the dollar to be convertible into gold.  in fact, his view of what the source or  the value of the dollar is is exactly that.  the, the, the value, the dollars  is valuable because it's convertible into gold.  okay?  that's, that's the, that's the answer.  there.  and, and that kind of idea is one of the things that  i was starting with yesterday, the la, the last, the last lecture, right?  gold was at the top, everything was a promise to pay gold ultimately.  okay. so it's conistent with this,  with this point of view.  so he thinks we should have a central bank.  he thinks the gold standard's a good thing.  but he doesn't think it, it, it works perfectly well.  we need to get, we need to develop a better financial institutions.  [blank_audio]  .  
is about hyman minsky. maybe you remember the one of,  [inaudible]  this was a fellow i knew, hyman minsky, as a matter of fact.  he's very much in this tradition, this american tradition that i mentioned  to you of, of wesley clair mitchell, of ed shaw, of morris copeland.  i'm going to tell you more about  [inaudible]  morris copeland today.  and the tradition that i consider my own ancestry, so i'm trying to do my best to  live up to this, to this, to my, to my to my intellectual fathers here.  when this crisis, the financial crisis in the united states started to happen  the new yorker had a very famous talk of the town lead article.  saying that this was a minsky moment. that it was  for, for somebody like, like hy who grew up in new york.  if he, if he had been alive, that would be immortality  to have, to have an article in new yorker appreciating your work.  after all those decades of not being appreciated maybe by economists.  so he will have something, he was thinking about he  had something called the financial instability hypothesis that he pushed.  and i, i, i write  about that in that article.  suggesting that there was something inherently unstable about  financial systems and that the role of the central  bank is to kind of put bounds on that and  prevent it from flying off into, into, into space.  either on the upside or on or on the downside.  and it's not so easy to do that.  that's a very different vision the financial system than this notion sort of  technocratic vision of well, we need to like, move the, move the fed funds  rate another 25 basis points in order to get it just right or something.  so he, he was, his mentality was on that was prepared for financial crisis.  and i suppose in a sense maybe mine is too.  the, this thing here on the right and the left.  this is the flow of funds matrix.  this is a set of accounts that was developed by a guy named morris copeland,  who was again one of these american institutionalists.  i'm going to explain how to read these accounts later on in this lecture.  but i just want to alert you there.  this isn't this isn't up there for no reason.  we're going to understand this and be able to, to, this is  their image of what the econ, what's going on in the economy.  okay?  you're used to in your macroeconomics classes to have  two sorts of images about how money comes in, right?  there's the nipa accounts, the national  common product accounts.  c plus i plus g plus net exports equals, equals income.  and there's also the quantity theory.  mv equals pt and those two equations have  sort of dominated the way people think about macro.  there was another tradition that was proposed by  morris coplin in 1952 using this set of accounts.  okay?  and it has continued, many people use those accounts  in wall street and within the fed they, they exist.  but no one has ever figured out how  to turn it into a proper macroeconomic theory.  and many people thought that that's really,  really what we should be trying to do.  [blank_audio]  
the first section, the next section of the class  that we're going to do is thinking about the payment system.  okay banking as a system of payments.  and central banking as a clearing house, okay.  so it's, it's a pretty it's an  unusual approach to beginning thinking about banking.  but i've found that it really helps to  build intuition for later on in the course.  and in particular, it helps to  explain why the fed funds market is such a key,  key place and also what's going in the repo market.  and so it helps to introduce some of the  main monetary instruments, in the eurodollar market as well.  so that's what we're going to use it for.  but this first lecture is meant to set that up and tell you sort of  what do we mean by payment system and where do all the little pieces fit.  so, it's titled the central bank as a clearinghouse.  [cough]  so, one big picture idea is to  think of all of the institutions in the, in the monetary  system, in the credit system. as all of the different instruments, all  of the different practices, as an attempt worked out over  eons okay, to make the system work as if it were one big bank,  instead of a bunch of little banks. okay.  so, let's start by just thinking of it, eh, how  payments would work if in fact it were one big bank.  and then see how the mechanisms make it work as if it were one big bank.  even though it's not. okay.  so, one big bank, by one big bank,  we might mean two different things. okay.  one idea, two different things.  remember this is basically building on last time.  i talked about the difference between the money  system, discipline system, and the credit system, elasticity system.  so one idea of a one big bank is that  you have a bank that has it's as assets holding reserves.  okay, say maybe gold just all, just all gold  and then it has these deposits on the liability side  from let's say two different people so that we have something where we can make a  payment person alpha and person beta. okay.  so that if there's a payment between alpha and beta, what this is really  just, is moving money from one account to another, or even just a book entry.  no reserves have to move at all. right?  it's just if everyone in the world. has a deposit account at this one bank.  then all you're doing is just moving stuff from one account to another.  and in fact the reserves are kind of, they don't even matter.  you know, you never are moving reserves in your vault.  they just stay there.  okay.  the problem with the pure money system which  is what we've seen, we've seen last time  is that when you run your deposits down  to zero, you're, you can't make any more purchases.  okay?  you can only make purchases if you have if you have a  positive, a positive thing or if you're able to then borrow from somebody  else who'll give you a deposit account to do it with so  there has to be some bi-lateral borrowing possibly behind it, behind the scenes.  the ia-meth, okay, in your problems that you'll see.  the ia-meth was set up on this model, okay?  that, it's, there's a fixed, a fixed  balance sheet size and we're just reallocating.  every now and then they expand their balance  sheet in one big trosh, okay?  but, it's on this discipline, kind of, model.  okay?  the other one big bad model is a pure credit system.  okay.  where the bank has deposit accounts.  but it takes advantage of the fact that  no reserves, really, are needed, to make this go.  and, it has, it has credit on the liability side.  so, what am i calling these?  overdrafts, yes, overdrafts.  overdrafts of person gamma, and of person lambda.  and, now, depending on the pattern of payments this balance sheet either expands  or contracts or nothing happens at all. so, just to see that,  think about a matrix showing all the possible  patterns of payment from alpha, beta, gamma,  lambda, to alpha, beta, gamma, lambda okay.  so from on this axis and then 2 on this axis.  and you can see what happens.  okay, if eh, well, certainly these are all zeroes on this axis, okay.  that is you're paying yourself there's no change  in the balance sheet, so these are just zeroes.  if alpha is paying beta, okay, that's also, there's no  expansion of the balance sheet or contraction of the balance sheet.  what we're trying to look at here is, is there  a change in the aggregate money supply or in the size  of the balance sheet depending on the pattern of payments.  if alpha pays beta or beta pays alpha there's no change.  okay, so it's just the same as the pure money system.  and of course, the same is true of these people over here.  okay, these people with overdrafts.  if somebody with an overdraft pays somebody with an overdraft okay, one  of those overdrafts gets bigger, and one of those overdrafts gets smaller.  okay, so,  but overall total overdrafts stay the same.  so again we have zero blocks here.  okay?  where there's an expansion of credit happens when somebody  on one side pays somebody on the other side.  okay? so just think about this.  if depositor, if, if mr alpha okay, who has a positive deposit here pays mr gamma  okay deposits go down but overdrafts also go down.  right?  he's, he's being paid so he's paying back some of his debt to the bank.  okay, so both of these go down so if alpha is paying gamma the money supply  contracts or rather the measured size of the balance sheet if we think of, of that.  often the balance sheet is measured as sort of the size of the liability  side or something but the size of the balance sheet in general goes down.  if alpha pays gamma, and of course that's going to be true if it's lambda, as well.  and of course it's going to be true, if its beta doing the paying as well.  so these are all negative numbers here.  but, if somebody with an overdraft pays somebody with a positive deposit  the overdraft gets bigger, and the deposit gets bigger, both of them, okay.  so, these are all pluses, here.  okay, so this is just another way of saying, what i said last time okay.  but now with sort of balance sheets, and  concrete payments, and more people stuff like that.  so that you can nail this a little, a little more.  okay, so the one big bank idea, okay. is that you want to have a system  where mutually, mutually beneficial trades can happen.  people who want to buy from each other, and, and, and if there's a  willing buyer and a willing seller, the payment system shouldn't stand in the way.  okay.  and you can see that in that regard the credit payment system is more flexible.  okay, it can do everything that the money payment  system did, which is sort of up here, okay.  but it can also do other kinds of payments as well.  and so, most actual payment systems, and certainly in the united  states, our payment system domestically is really sort of this character.  it's of this, it's of this credit character here.  i said the imf is an example of this okay? you should think of the federal reserve  system as an example  of this.  
to start off with, i have put up on the screen the flow of funds matrix for  2011 that we looked at a couple, couple of times ago, and i just want to, for, and  you can see across the horizontal, you can  see the different entities, households, non-financial business, state and  local governments, federal governments, and this is actually  the cumulative, so this is like a balance sheet.  these are assets and liabilities, not sources  and uses here that i'm showing you.  and i draw your  attention to domestic financial sectors, to line  12, which is fed funds and security repos.  and let me just see if i can make this a little bigger here.  good.  all right.  so here domestic financial sectors and line 12 is  well, let's see.  there, fed funds and security repos, so let's just see if we can take that across,  there, so you can see this is it here, 823 assets here and  these are billions. and 1.1 billion so that's 1.1 trillion.  liabilities.  so, the, the thing that i wanted to let you see here is that in the federal funds  market, this is an interbank market, so this is the whole financial sector and  they're borrowing to and from each other.  so, that's why it enters as both a liability and an asset.  that some banks are, are lending to, to other banks and so  the loans show up as assets for the bank doing the lending.  and is liabilities for the bank doing. doing the borrowing.  there's also some entities other than banks in this market.  and that's why these numbers aren't, aren't exactly the same.  but these are the big numbers in that, in that line if you can see.  the other, the other  numbers are all, are all orders of magnitude smaller, smaller than that.  so this is the first thing to say about the fed fund's market.  it's an interbank borrowing market, okay.  and what they are borrowing.  are reserves, okay, reserves which are liabilities of the fed, okay,  now remember the hierarchy of money, i talked to you about,  okay, that reserves at the fed, the fed is sort of  at the top, it can create this high powered money, okay,  and so from the point of view of these banks, okay.  reserves are money.  fed funds are credit.  fed funds are promises to pay money. inter-bank promises.  so it's the credit expansion on the base of the existing  money that is on the balance sheet of the, of the fed.  this is very important to appreciate.  fed funds are not either the liability or the  asset of the fed, even though they say fed.  they're the asset and the liability of banks,  we're going to see that in a minute, but just  to start there because if you get off on the wrong  foot there you could be halfway through the lecture before realizing  where you are, okay, that these are forms of interbank credit.  the second thing that i want to.  draw to your attention is here.  okay.  so this is the fed funds rate.  fed funds effective rate which i just told is right now 0.16.  and you can see that it fluctuates.  this is from the st. lewis, it's called fed, and  you can see how the fed funds rate has fluctuated cyclically.  these dark lines are, are cyclical contractions of the economy as a whole.  you can see the financial crisis here where  the fed in the crisis there you see there in 2009 it lowered the fed funds rate,  this is a policy rate from 5% to 2% and then beyond that to nearly zero.  okay.  that is the, that's the interest rate response of the, of the  policy makers and it's been sort of at zero near zero ever since.  the actual target rate is, is, is in the range zero to  0.25 and so we're smack in the middle really of that range right  now with, with 0.16, is the, is the idea.  it used to be so and this is again a thing i want to start out with.  it used to be so, that the fed used the fed funds rate.  as a policy rate to try to manipulate the real economy.  okay.  it would raise rates to try to slow the economy,  it would lower rates to try to speed it up.  but we're not smack against the zero bound as you can see.  and so we're not seeing much movement in  that and what we're seeing instead is so called  quantitative easing, flucuation of the size of the balance sheet.  the up and down, not changes in the price of, of, of reserves.  and in fact there are, it used to be, that there were  not very many actual official reserved on the balance of the fed, okay?  there were and i was just looking at my  notes from the last time i taught this course.  you know, typically there was about 50 billion dollars worth  of, of reserves on the balance sheet of the fed.  and now there's over a trillion, okay?  there's excess reserves, so there's, there's no, a sense in which.  the the reserves are not scarce anymore.  and yet the fed funds market is still active.  okay?  so even though the underlying thing that they're promising  to pay is not, is not is not so  scarce anymore but that's because they're being used for  for payment system which is what we're going to.  which is where we're  going to start here.  
so they are again  interest rates, interests rates. here we go so us dollar  libor, i write it that way instead of euro dollar so that you can find it when you  are looking in the ft there, and us dollar overnight rate is 0.1509.  okay. and then a little farther down, we see us  overnight repo, 0.31. and  then a little father down, fed funds affective, 0.16.  okay.  what i'm showing in this graph up here, this is a, this is from a  paper i wrote before the crisis and it was a thing i used, i developed actually  from this lecture, and when i used to teach money and, money and banking before  the crisis, in which the key, the typical  relationship of interest rates in these three rates.  was that the repo was the lowest rate.  repo was lowest, fed funds was the next and libor was  above that. okay?  that's not the ratio we have here now.  okay?  repo is above fed funds and i developed a whole elaborate story which  we'll talk here about why it is that repo is less than fed funds.  what's the story there?  somebody came up after lecture last time and said, what's all that about?  repo is greater than fed funds but you said it's a secured rate.  okay, so it's safer.  why is it higher interest to borrow in the repo market  when it's secured than the fed fund markets when it's, when it's unsecured.  you would think there would be a, a credit spread or something like that.  so i've done some thinking about that, and i have some  things that i'll come to the end to, to say about that.  it is, it is unusual.  it is very unusual.  and that's what this diagram is showing you.  this is a whole year of the, and what, what, what this, what  this graph is showing you is the difference between the fed fund's target.  so it's not  the effective, it's not a market rate. it's just the official rate.  fed funds target minus the euro dollar rate.  okay and the fed funds target minus the rp rate repress agreement rate and you can  see there that typically that this number. okay.  fed funds target minus repo.  okay. that number is typically positive.  okay?  you can see it's above the line, there. and that number is typically negative,  it's mostly below the line. okay?  so, that's in accord with that relationship i told you, okay.  that's usually your dollar's highest, then fed funds, then, then, then repo.  there are these, sort of, spikes down.  tier.  these are all moments.  this is a period from mid 2005 to mid 2006, when the fed was tightening.  it was tightened.  so the fed's fund target is marching up in stairway, stairway fashion.  and,  i left it, i left it this way so that you can see.  that basically, the market anticipates this.  okay, it, it, it sees that the target is probably going to get,  go up, and so the market interest rates go up before that.  and that's what you're seeing these downward spikes, okay?  the market interest rates go up before, and so you get a negative in both.  in both of, both of these.  fed funds effective in fact, marches up, with the market rates as, as well.  but in general  there was that, that, pattern. that pattern is now, is now is now broken.  
the subject for today is the eurodollar market.  remember so this is a third in a series of three.  we started with fed funds then we did repo, and now we're doing eurodollar.  these are the three main, short term wholesale money markets in the world.  and  [sound]  what i'm showing here in this diagram. this chart is the  eurodollar rate minus the fed fund's rate during the crisis.  okay, so there, there's two rates, that's  the eurodollar rate, which is sometimes called libor.  [noise]  and so when we talk about the eurodollar market, we're talking  about the market in which there's borrowing and lending at libor, okay?  that's, that's what that is.  libor minus ois, the overnight index swap, which is a sort of term fed funds.  [noise]  so this is a this is the relationship between  the eurodollar rate, and the, and the fed funds rate.  at one month out of three months.  and you can see that before nor, normally the euro/dollar rate is  a tiny bit higher than fed funds, just a few basis points.  somebody asked last time what is a basis point;  a basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.  okay.  so that if the interest rate is 2% 1  basis point more than that is 2.01% okay.  and in the money market the peep, everyone pays attention to basis points  and even farther along, not just one but, but the fourth decimal point too.  because typically you're dealing with very large sums of money and you know, a  $1 million, $10 million, these are small trades in this, in this, in this market.  so, the more decimal points you have it matters, if you're multiplying them by  very large numbers.  and what you're seeing is before the crisis these  things are basically right on top of each other, okay.  and after the crisis, these things are once again right on top of one another.  and it's what you, it's what you and why would you expect that to be true?  because you got banks, that can borrow either in libor or in fed funds.  they can lend either in libor or in fed funds.  and so why shouldn't, why should  these ever be any different from each other?  you know, because you, if there's any, any gap you borrow the cheap one, and you lend  the expensive one, and that's an arbitrage, and in  doing so you should be driving these rates closer.  so this is showing you the level of  disorganization of the world money market, during the crisis.  right?  but it's, and you see exactly where it started there in august.  in august of' 07.  when this, the spread between the fed funds rate, and the euro  dollar rate went from basically zero, a couple of basis points okay?  to a hundred, no almost, that's one percentage point there.  and so that's almost a 100 basis points. and you can see it just like  [noise],  you know.  it's, it's, it's just completely not the normal behavior of  this market at all, and it fluctuates a couple of times.  okay.  this was, and this was the fall in which i was, i was teaching this class.  okay.  and i was pointing to this, and i was saying,  something very bad is happening in the world money market.  okay.  and and we can sort of imagine what it is, okay?  that there are banks that do not have access  to the fed's fund market, okay, who really need to roll their funding, okay?  that one month or three month funding, and they can't get any banks  that do have access to the fed's fund market to lend to them.  so, there's a breakdown in the interbank, in  their in, interbank funding markets, that's going on here.  and so, they're driving this rate up, in order to create an incentive for somebody.  and this is a very big incentive,  for somebody to borrow in the feds funds market and lend it, and lend it libor.  100 basis points is just enormous.  okay?  and apparently that was needed for a while.  and then it came down, and then it came back up again.  and then this is i remind you a, this is bear stearns, when bear stearns failed.  you can see it looks to me like the fed stabilized the, these, these rates here.  because they  don't really move there for a while. there, there very high.  the gap is still very high, but they're not fluctuating around.  they're sort of stable, and then they lost control.  at lehman, and then they gain control again, and then the crisis subsided, okay.  so, this is all to motivate, why it might  be interesting to know something about the eurodollar market, okay.  so that when you see movements like this, you have a sense  of what's happening behind the scences. what could be happening that could be  causing this incredible dramatic. >> sort of  movement.  
so the reading this week is from john hicks, a market theory of money.  it's a book he published in 1989, the last thing he ever wrote.  he was an old man then.  um,and it was a very influential book for me.  i, i came to start teaching here in the fall of 1987.  so i was a young junior professor when i read this.  and it gave me an idea that i've sort of been working  with, ever since.  i only started teaching this course, money and banking, in 1996.  but this was, this has always been on my reading ever since the beginning.  and i think you'll see why in the, in the, in the reading.  he's an interesting guy, john hicks. he actually was responsible in a way.  for getting monetary economics started on what i came to  view as a sort of wrong path, or a misleading  path in an article he wrote in 1933. when he was young, okay.  so in 1989, he's writing and saying you know, that was maybe not such a good idea.  here's another way we could go and a market  theory of money, where he's thinking of banks as dealers.  that's exactly how we're going to be doing in this next two weeks.  so it has the imprimatur of noble price winner john hicks  even though it took him until the end of his life to see that maybe that  was the right way to go and he did not live to see the rest of it.  i think of him as the moses of modern economics.  i am showing here this.  hierarchy of money, which you may remember from, i think, lecture two.  i don't think i had a slide then, but i, i have, i have, i have a slide now.  in a way,  what we've been doing so far in this class  has been all focusing on this price of money part.  okay?  we've been talking about payments, okay?  and payments are, are made when, it, this is about  parts, a deposit account being delivered in payment of a debt.  or reserves being delivered in payment of a debt.  we've had an interest rate in the back background, and we've talked  about he feds fund rate and so forth, but we haven't explained  where this rate comes from, you know, or what's the market for it.  that's what we're going to do now.  okay, in the next two weeks, we're moving to thinking about, thinking about where  the interest rate comes from and what the central bank has to do with it.  after the midterm, we'll be talking about the exchange  rate here, so we'll be moving up in the hierarchy.  and we'll also be talking about other interest rates, not just  the money rate of interest, but also asset prices.  so the, the price of risk and things like, and things like that.  so we started in the middle and then we're going to move on, on either side.  we've been thinking about the banking system  making payments to each other, bank, banks back  and forth so that the means of payment have been reserves at the central bank.  so we've been talking about par relations between  currency and deposits banks, banks having to pay,  pay currency or, or reserves at the fed.  in order to, in order to make payments.  now we're going to be talking about, prices.  and we're going to be shifting to this, market maker.  thinking about banks and central banks as and in fact security dealers.  as market makers as people who create the  liquidity by offering by itself, options to anybody.  
a legal apparatus is, largely, balance sheets, there's other stuff too that  we'll get to in the class, but i just want to signal right now.  students that have some background in accounting or  might be find this a little bit easier  so, than others, but sometimes not because usually  accounting classes teach you what the law is.  what is gap accounting, and so forth.  and we're not concerned here with what the law is.  we're using balance sheets as an analytical structure, to structure  to, to help us think rigorously about the economy.  so let me just show you what i mean by that.  we start with a bank.  on the left hand side  is assets, on the right hand side is liabilities.  why don't i just write that in here  for the first time so that we remind ourselves.  in general, i wont be writing it in.  you'll just get used to knowing that assets are  on the left and liabilities are on the right, okay.  and we could think of a bank as, as having some  loans. some securities.  so, that might be like a treasury bill. and some  cash reserves. it's more complicated than that, but.  and on the liability side, you can think of this bank as having deposit  accounts,  [sound]  i'm going to put in other borrowing. because they  might be issuing bonds, or other kinds of short term money market borrowing.  in fact, that's going to be a very big  part of this course, is understanding other borrowing.  and then a balancing item here, net worth. okay?  this is what the balance sheet of a generic bank sort of looks like.  and i, i'm drawing this to draw your attention to  two sorts of issues that arise when we're thinking about banks.  one is the issue of solvency.  is this bank solvent or not?  we've been having some issues with that in the last few years.  and europe is having its issues, issues now.  perhaps entire national banking systems are bankrupt  in any, in any literal solvent way.  solvency just  means, is the value of the assets greater than the value of  the, of the liabilities, so that the net worth is greater than 0?  [inaudible]  a balancing item. is it, is the net worth greater than 0?  so this is about the market value  of assets versus the market value of liabilities.  a lot of the discussion about banking systems are, is about that.  but in this course, we're going to focus most attention actually on what  is very specific about banking that makes them different from other corporations.  okay.  which is the issue of liquidity  [sound]  okay  and that's here. cash reserves, okay?  if a depositor transfers their deposit to somebody else, tries to  make a payment to somebody else, can, does the bank have liquidity?  does it have cash reserves in order to make that payment.  these are demand deposits.  they can be withdrawn  at any moment, okay?  is, does it have its reserves and if it doesn't, can it acquire them?  can it borrow them in the money markets, okay?  can it go to the fed ultimately at a, at a, to the, to the, to the window?  can it sell a security or repo a security?  these are words you haven't heard, okay.  but you're, you're going to know what these are pretty soon.  and, or well does it have to liquidate these loans?  sell them at a fire sale price? and if it does.  what happens to solvency?  if it sells them at a fire sale price,  you know, the assets are, are sold below their value.  so, there's a link between liquidity and solvency.  most econo, economists approach banking by thinking first about solvency.  we're going to approach banks by thinking first  about liquidity and see where that leads us.  and you're going to, that's how bankers think.  they face this liquidity constraint every day.  they have to clear  their accounts.  the first two weeks of this course is about the payment system, oddly enough.  okay?  but you'll see why. okay?  it will, it will all connect up. this is a balance sheet.  of a traditional bank.  but we're also going to be talking about shadow banks.  [sound].  i'm involved in a research team that's just finished a paper on shadow  banking which i'm going to be talking about at the end of the course.  i wasn't sure i would finish it in time so i put it at the end of the course.  and so this is assets and liabilities here and, and when i tell you about  a shadow bank, i mean an entity that  is holding lets say residential mortgage backed securities.  so these are loans that are, are turned into a bond of a kind.  you know, this is all just to give you an impression.  by the way, all this lecture is all  sort of written down and it's going to posted in  course-works too, you're going to get used to that so  that you don't have to necessarily write everything down.  but if you feel, if that helps you, by all means do it.  residential mortgage backed securities, and then they strip out some of the risk.  as much risk as possible from this.  maybe with something  called an interest rate swap. okay?  getting rid of the interest rate risk involved.  something like a credit default swap.  getting rid of some of the credit risk, selling that off to somebody else.  so that what you have left is a short-term, relatively risk free thing  that you can use as collateral for borrowing in the wholesale money market.  so there's money market borrowing here.  [noise]  they're not borrowing from you and me, okay?  but they're borrowing from money market  mutual funds, they're borrowing from big corporate,  corporate investors, and the instruments they're using  are things like repurchase agreements rp, okay.  euro dollars.  [unknown]  dollar borrowing. asset-backed commercial paper, okay?  there's all kind, we're going to understand what  all these things are, it's not rocket science.  but the point is that what is happened in the world,  is that this model, is, it had, became the dominant one.  you know, the amount of credit in the, in the, in the united states that  ran through this sort of meth, meth,  method, became larger than that kind of method.  the textbooks are all about that, okay, but reality is increasingly about that.  and, and we need to, we need to bring that into our, into our minds.  again, there's an issue of solvency.  again there's an issue of solvency. and an issue of liquidity.  but it's not so easy as, as it is  in the regular, in the, in the regular banking system.  the issue of liquidity is really about being able to roll over this funding.  okay, if using this as collateral for the funding this is short term funding, so if,  if the money markets freeze up, you can't roll it over, you have to liquidate, okay.  this is what a lot of the financial crisis is about, okay.  is, is exactly this kind  of problem, okay.  and i'm waving my hands now, okay, because  i don't want to get into, into it too deep.  but in a few weeks, you know, you'll, you'll understand all this stuff.  this is not, it's not, it's not rocket science.  it can, it can be understood and it's my mission to help people understand it.  i think we're in a teaching moment in history, where we need to understand this.  the general population needs to understand how this stuff  works because we need to make some big decisions.  about, about,  about how to regulate this new system.  the regulatory system we have is all about that kind of banking, okay?  and we don't really know what we're  going about regulating this, .frank doesn't touch it.  okay?  so this is what the issue is about.  so we're talking about banking, we're also talking about.  i want to, the final thing here i want to show you another.  this is a bank, the central bank is a bank.  this is, this is the balance sheet of the fed, okay.  that's from, from the, from what does it say there?  august 30th, 2012.  factors affecting reserve balances and depository institutions.  what you see there, can you see it if i point here?  yeah, you can see that. so, here this is actually, they list  on this page, this is all assets.  so, it's just the left-hand side of my balance sheet there.  and you see what the fed has there, u.s.  treasury securities. are 1.6 trillion dollars.  bills or short term trea, short term securities.  they've sold them all off.  they have no short term securities anymore.  maybe you were note, maybe you heard about this.  that they were moving into long term, long  term debt and they have that notes and bonds.  so forth.  federal, federal agencies, debt securities.  that's like fanny mae and freddie mac. mortgage backed securities.  these are private mortgage backed securities.  okay, the fed has bought mortgage backed securities itself.  for the very first time ever in history, okay?  it never imagined was ever going to do that.  this is part of the legacy of the crisis.  if you look down, and look there's, it's not like there's small amounts there,  there's 852 billion dollars, and those are,  these are big numbers, the central bank here.  these things here, maiden lane, all this.  this is left over from the aig, and lehman, and all those sorts of things.  and we, we can talk about. they're small numbers now.  they were large numbers.  central bank liquidity swaps, these are the fed  lending to other central banks, to the ecb.  to the swiss national bank, to the bank of japan.  okay, there's this whole, the, the point i  want to emphasize, in many economics classes you've had,  you talk about this.  and you talk about m d equal m s, money demand equals money supply, okay?  now, we're saying, well what the actual things  that are behind the scenes there, are banks.  okay?  and the central bank is a bank, it's  not printing money, it has liabilities and assets.  it's just not correct to say that it's printing money, when it's expanding the  money supply.  it's expanding both sides of the balance  sheet, asset and liabilities at the same time.  this is, this is a classic banking operation, it happens at all levels.  the central bank and also farther down.  it's something that we're going to pay a lot of attention to.  so, there you see the total size of the balance sheet is, is there, $2.8 trillion.  by the way, before the crisis, it was less than 1 trillion.  so, when i say that the size of the balance sheet tripled, that's,  that's about right.  and here are the li, here's the liability side.  so you can see that the liabilities of the central bank are  about 1 trillion of currency in  circulation, that's green pieces of paper, okay.  there's also a bunch of other small numbers, then there's this other big  number, 1.5 trillion dollars reserve balances with federally reserved banks.  this is excess reserves. okay?  the banks have to hold reserves, cash reserves, this  is, these are held as, as deposits at the fed.  they're holding 1.5 trillion dollars worth of those.  1.5 trillion dollars worth of those.  before the crisis, that number was 50 billion dollars.  okay.  there, it's an order of magnitude change.  the system has changed very dramatically.  that's what, this sort of thing is when people talk about  qe1, qe2, qe3 they're talking about the transformation of  the fed's balance sheet, that i'm showing you, you here.  this is stuff that we are going to try to understand in this, in this course.  
now let's actually talk about dealers. dealers in, in securities.  i'm just going to have a hypothetical dealer.  this is not what their balance sheet really looks like.  but let's start here.  because, we'll connect it, to the, the, it connects to the supermarket idea here.  a dealer that is making a two sided market in a security.  a particular stock, a particular bond.  when we say it makes a two sided market, we mean, they're willing to  trade the security for money and they're willing to trade money for the security.  they're willing to go either way.  now, we just learned, for the west side market that the secret is inventories.  so, if you want to be a dealer,  a two-sided dealer, you need two inventories.  you need inventories of cash, and you need inventories of securities.  so,  you might think of a dealer as having a balance sheet like this.  they have a certain wealth, a certain capital, and  they just allocate it as between cash and securities.  and they allow the quantity of those  inventories to fluctuate depending on supply and demand.  okay.  that's a sort of building intuition about how dealers work.  so, if you  think about this, this dealer over time. if their capital is sort of fixed there.  okay.  you could think of their inventory fluctuating like this, where this  is the amount of cash and this is the amount of securities.  you know? so what i'm, i'm showing here  is here, this line, this is in price here. this is your inventories.  this is your, this balance sheet here.  this is your inventories this is your, this balance sheet here.  as people are selling this dealer securities.  okay. that is depleting their cash holding.  so they had this much cash, now they have this much cash.  so, they're buying securities and depleting their cash holdings.  and then here it goes the other way around.  okay.  they're selling securities and increasing their cash holdings.  and so, they're absorbing the fluctuation in,  in demand on their balance sheet.  they're absorbing it in their inventories, moving that inventory around.  and in principle, if they had a large  enough inventory, the price wouldn't move at all.  them, the price could be completely constant.  okay?  and that, but demand flow is moving around.  we're going to have to relax that, because that becomes important.  but, but ille, here you can just see the inventory stuff, pure and simple.  imagine life without  a dealer like this.  there's fluctuating demand for these securities.  okay?  what that means is that if, that, that if somebody wants  to buy securities, they have to find somebody to sell them securities.  either, they have to beat the woodwork and find them by raising the price they offer.  okay.  say, i really want to buy the security, so i know  that, that it's only worth ten but i'll pay 12.  okay.  or they just have to wait until they see somebody who wants to sell.  so without the dealers, we got this  problem of time waiting for, demanders have to  wait for suppliers or suppliers have to wait  for demanders, depending on where the imbalance is.  or we have price.  okay.  that you have to use price in order to bring  supply to you, or to, or to bring demand to you.  so the price is going to.  so, so dealers are smoothers. right?  they're smoothers, i, i said if they have enough  inventories here, they could conceivably just make the price flat.  okay?  that's a lot of smoothing.  okay?  not only do they make, can they make the price flat, but  they make the the waiting time before you do a deal into  infinitesimal like.  because you don't have to find somebody on the other side of the trade.  the dealer is standing ready to be on the other side of the trade, all of the time.  you don't have to wait, you can just buy.  so compare the securities market to the housing market.  if you try to buy a house, there's no dealer.  okay?  you gotta, you gotta go and you gotta hunt for a house.  and a broker takes you around, and you look at  all these house and then you decide that you maybe wait.  so, there's a lot of time issue there.  okay?  if you want to buy a house and the, and the person doesn't want to sell,  you might walk, knock on their door and say, i like your house.  and, and, and the guy says, well.  really?  how much are you willing to pay.  you know, and so if you say that you know what's going to happen.  you're going to over pay, because you're trying to push somebody out  of the house that's not ready to move out the house.  similarly on the sell side, if you try to sell  a house you know, you might wait for a long time.  okay?  and, and, and if you really need to  sell quickly, you might have to lower your price.  so, you can see that  in a broker market, you have both these time problem and this price problem.  in a dealer market, there's this smoothing.  dealers aren't doing this you know, to do  you favors, they're doing it to make money.  so we need to think about the economics of the dealer function.  but i'm trying to create some intuition here about why this is kind of magical.  you know, it's and, and and it's, it's a, it,  it, it, it is a a market micro-structure piece that is missing from  our microeconomics textbooks, where it's just  supply crossing demand and there's a price.  and we don't ask is that a continuous price, is that a discontinuous price  what would be the inconvenience if we  were having ill-liquid markets instead of liquid markets.  typically, we assume in microeconomics and  in general equilibrium too, we assume perfect liquidity.  that if you want to buy something, you can, you can buy it.  okay.  there's a market clearing price all the time.  there's an assumption of perfect liquidity.  we're going to come back and see why this assumption,  in a certain sense, just has to be false.  it, it has to be false.  because, dealers are, are supplying market liquidity and not  doing it for free. okay?  if liquidity was free, so that there was, there was an infinite  quantity of it, it was a free good, dealers wouldn't provide it.  so, the abstraction we have in price theory is  an abstraction that's logically impossible for, for liquid markets.  
okay?  and let's think about the let's think  about their, their position in the money markets.  now, i prepared you for this a little bit last time.  okay?  so we're but, but let's first think of them as a security dealer.  so we have, if we think of the security dealer.  i need to introduce a few concepts here.  if we think of them, first of all, just as  a security dealer, we can separate their book into two pieces.  what i'm going to call a matchbook piece and a speculative dealer piece.  okay?  and so, let's imagine that this dealer has securities in.  of 100 and securities out of 100.  and these are the same securities, okay, so he  has a, a shor, a long, a short position and a long  position in the same securities. so this is what we mean by matched book.  i'm not writing very well today.  matched book. okay?  the trainer model, ignores matched book, right?  all of this gross position on the balance sheet here.  okay.  nets to 0, so it's right there. okay?  what trainer says dealers are worried about is their net position.  okay?  is it because that exposes them to price risk?  okay, so let's put that now on here, we'll call net financing here of 10.  okay, and then the financing itself, loans of 10, so i'm showing like a long  position in bonds here, and i'm using this word for a reason you'll,  you'll we'll come back to it, but think of that as a long position in bonds.  okay, that's finance by borrowing here. so here you do have a position, right?  if the price of these bonds falls, okay, then you have a loss.  if the price rises you, you have a gain.  so it's this part of the balance sheet, okay, that trainer was focused on.  but if you look at the actual balance sheets  of actual dealers, this is about the order of magnitude.  you know, most of it is gross exposure, you know.  most of it is matched book.  only a little bit of it is net exposure here, okay?  they're making a lot of money doing this, or they wouldn't be doing it.  okay?  and that's not really in the trainer, in the trainer model.  so we'll call this the speculative book here.  or the trainer book.  because that's what he's talking about.  but, i just want you to appreciate that  he's not talking about the entire, the entire book.  okay?  but i didn't spell it out in clear detail. because  i wasn't going to use them yet, okay? now we're going to use them and we're to  use them by flipping our attention, a little gestalt switch, okay, from the  security dealer, as a dealer in securities to the security dealer as a dealer  in money.  this is just to remind you this is on the new york  fed's website and it shows here,  this line here memorandum reversed repurchase agreements.  repurchase agreements, overnight and continuing and term agreements here.  okay?  you remember a couple of lectures back, when i  think maybe when i was doing repo, okay, i said  we can use these numbers to construct a balance  sheet for the dealer showing them as a money dealer.  okay.  and so let's just do that, let's just copy the numbers first.  okay. so this is now real numbers.  those were made up numbers. okay?  and we're going to call them a money dealer now, okay, because we're thinking.  we're, we're thinking of the securities as just  collateral for these money positions, and then thinking  about the mo, the borrowing and lending in  the money market that's happening using these securities.  and so we have assets and liabilities. there's 854 of overnight reverse.  [blank_audio]  overnight reverse, there's 1253 of  term reverse. there's  1796 of overnight repo.  and there's 826 of term repo. okay.  here just to remind you, a reverse is the  same thing as a repo except the other side, okay?  so, if repo is borrowing money by giving securities as  a collateral, reverse is lending money taking insecurities as collateral.  so it's the same instrument, just. just opposite sides.  and that's what dealers are, they're on opposite sides of the same instrument.  well, that should make you think now, opposite sides of the same instrument?  so, there's a matched book, somewhere,  underlying all of this? yes, there is, okay.  so, let's calculate it.  let's rewrite all of this in matched book way.  over here. so, this is the actual numbers.  and now let's just use our concepts.  okay.  and you can see that and, and, and, so we want to match up.  and lets just say that these terms are the same  terms, just because this is, this is for conceptual purpose.  i don't know if they're the same terms.  the data, it doesn't tell that detailed, okay.  but just imagine.  that these are all 1 month or something like that,  term reverse and term and, and and term repo here.  they're probably not, okay.  but, but you can continue, you could elaborate the same style of analysis.  so these are overnight, so there's 854 overnight and  854 overnight, okay, that would be match book, okay.  we have some left over. how much do we have left over.  i did this math before class to make sure that i got it right.  okay?  so, here i'm doing exactly what i did with the securities.  right?  i'm, i'm carving out the match book part. and now let's do the term 826  [blank_audio].  and 826. these are billions by the way  so these are large, large numbers.  okay.  and so there's something left over then from the term too, and that number is 427.  when you add both sides, there's also something left over.  and that's 515 net financing.  okay? so this is like bonds, okay.  these, these are bonds that are being  financed in the overnight repo market, okay.  and this is term repo, that's being financed in  the overnight market, and it should add to 942.  these, these things here. and it looks good, okay.  so you see i haven't done, i haven't, the numbers are  all the same, they're all the same, i have just rearranged  them so that you can say this is the  matched book part and this is the speculative book part.  okay.  now i want to do one more thing, okay.  in order to help us move toward using the trainer model for banking.  think about these. this, these, these are bonds.  okay?  let's, let's move a little bit more. let's think about these as bonds.  okay?  these are bonds that the dealer is financing.  and let's think about this, this dealer as financing them with term repo  instead of with overnight, so we can separate out 2 different kinds of risk.  okay? how much term repo  would you need to finance 515? well, 515.  now we've added term repo to one side, we have to add term repo  to the other side so that we maintain our, our balance of our  [unknown]  and we're not changing any exposures. okay?  and, you could see just by the math, that  what that does is basically allow you to write.  i'm just adding it up there, okay.  we have two kinds of risk, okay, that the dealer is exposed to here.  okay?  this bottom one, you have bonds and you're  financing them in the term repo market.  okay, so this is the kind of trainer risk,  this is price risk, this is bond price risk.  so we know about that.  we have a model about that. this is price risk.  but what is this? what is this line, here?  these, these exposures.  so you see am reading across, am not, so  am looking at each line as being a different exposure.  so here, you're borrowing overnight and you're lending for a month.  so you're borrowing short, and you're lending long, both of these are  secured loans, secured with some kind of, of bond of some kind.  and so  you're basically a bank is what you're doing.  you're, you're, these are like deposit accounts.  okay?  this are, this is, this is demand deposit here  and this a one month, a one month loan here.  okay?  this is liquidity risk.  this is liquidity risk that the dealers are exposed  to because they have to roll this funding every day.  every day this funding comes due.  in fact, it, it, they're, it's actually rolled.  typically you need to, the collateral comes back and you do it again.  sometimes there's, there's agreements to do it automatically,  but, but you could pullout it's overnight repo.  so, you, this is liquidity risk.  this could be a run on the bank.  the kind of thing that broke the reserve primary fund, okay?  so, this is liquidity risk.  so how do we think of, so we know how to talk about price  risk, can we use the trainer model to talk about this kind of risk?  and i want to suggest that we can.  the important thing to emphasize is this balance sheet.  is the same as this balance sheet.  i haven't changed anything.  all i've done is rearrange it so it tells a different story, okay?  all the numbers are the same.  
i suggested last time that when when vagic convinced central banks that you  you you are bound to lend freely at a high interest rate in a  in a in a crisis against good security and that's your responsibility and  you should bring this up to consciousness and and and plan to do this.  once a central bank accepted that responsibility, they then started to  think how could we avoid the crisis in the first place?  and so they invented monetary policy.  and, and it evolved since 1873.  to what it is today, or what it was right before the crisis.  and i want to start with that normal monetary policy first.  okay.  as a background and then we'll and then we'll get to when thing go extraordinary.  so the chapter 9, instagum, talks about monetary policy a bit.  and if you read  through that, you notice that there is a  kind of ambivalence about what the fed is controlling.  what is its lever of control?  is it controlling the quantity of money?  or the quantity of reserves?  or some quantitative measure, balance sheet measure?  or is it controlling the price of money?  the fed funds rate or, or something like that.  what is its, what is its actual tool?  okay. now, from, from the point of view of,  this is an important thing from the point  of view of monetary theory, because there's this view.  one idea is that you can understand all there is to know  about money with the quantity with, with the equation of exchange here.  and that's of course controlling the quantity of money will  control the price level in some way is a notion.  so people who emphasize quantities tend to have something like this in  the back of their mind, okay.  people who emphasize interest rates, okay, tend to have something more  like this money market view of the world that i'm talking about.  but there i think there's a translation between  them and let me just, just show you what  it is so that you don't get hung up on the wrong things here at the beginning.  remember that i told you at the very beginning, okay.  that we can think of the, of the system  a, as a, as a hierarchical one with money at the top.  and credit at the bottom. and zero here.  and the point is that up here at the top is the fed.  at least when we're talking about the domestic monetary system.  so you could and, and, and the fed controls this best money of all.  okay?  it's its own liability. and so and and  it can use that control in some way to influence  the balance between discipline and elasticity in the system okay,  i said this in maybe lecture 1 or 2 okay  and now you are starting to see how it does  and so forth so that's you could say that a  sort of quantity way of thinking about it, a little  bit you might not be using necessarily this terminology here  because usually this measure of m is something like quantity  of money held by households okay, not the end of the fed  by high powered money bank reserve or something like that but certainly,  it's a quantity and and, and so a quantity perspective on how  the fed controls, i would urge you to view it this way.  say you know, if you want to think in  quantitative terms, think well, the fed is sitting  on top of the heriarchy controlling the best  money of all because it's its own liability.  that's a quantitative control.  on the other hand, if you want to think about price in this way the interest  rates on this axis and the maturity on this axis and then theres a term  structure of interest rates, typically upward sloping  here and the fed is sitting right here,  ok, with the overnight fed funds rate is  what is pegging at the shortest possible maturity.  and that is being is  an insert rate. is a policy rate.  and out here we have securities prices. long bond prices and stuff like this.  so the market is kind of determining this. okay, the fed is determining this.  similarly here, the fed is determining  this, the market is determining credit, okay.  so what we're really talking about always when we're talking  about monetary policy, is the transmission mechanism from something the  fed controls, or, or, or it's own balance sheet,  to the larger financial system and then the larger economy.  and whether you're using one, one of these languages  or another you're talking at same, about the same thing.  now  [unknown]  she talks a little bit about the history  of targeting targeting strategies that the fed used.  and i'll just put down a couple of dates here.  1951, the fed started targeting something called free reserves.  okay. and in 1979, this is the thing that's  [inaudible].  saturday night special tar targeting  non borrowed reserves and a  1983 borrowed reserves and then  in 1987. switched to the fed funds rate.  and that's sort of where we've been ever since, okay.  i'm just putting this list here so that you can see that the  fed itself has sort of changed, in a way it's changing its communications strategy.  i'm not actually sure, that it changed very  much, when it actually did, it changed how  it explained what it did, or or and i could get into that in some detail.  i think it's maybe, beside the point for today's  lecture, but i just want to alert you that the fed is constantly messing with,  with what it's paying attention to or what it's claiming to pay attention to.  in 1979 that is when volkor.  took over, and there was this, this very double-digit inflation, and so forth.  and it's often thought that he, he, he claimed he was a convert to monetarism.  okay.  and and that he needed to control the money supply in  order to control the price level and get this under control.  most people think that this was, he was not a  genuine control-, convert to monetarism, that this was a convenient language.  for him to hide behind because he knew that stopping inflation  would mean moving interest rates to double digits and that if  he said, oh, we're going to fight inflation, and what i'm going to  do is i'm going to jack the fed funds rate up to 15%.  okay.  he might not have survived his, his confirmation.  but when he said i'm a monetarist the consequence of that being i'm  going to jack interest rates up to 15% but we don't say those things.  then he was able to do it.  and, and, and stop this inflationary cycle in its, in its tracks.  
so now let's add another layer on top of that.  okay.  let's see this same hierarchy in terms of  the entities that are issuing and holding this stuff.  so there's a hierarchy of institutions as, as well.  and for that we need, because, whenever we  talk about institutions, we're talking about balance sheets,  okay?  so, we're talking about a central bank,  [sound]  bankers bank, which is issuing  currency and holding gold.  so, it's holding reserves of the international,  of the international money and issuing as its own liability, the national money.  okay. this is what, this is an idealized picture  of what a central bank looks like. there's other stuff here.  maybe there's treasury bills or stuff like that.  i'm just going to, i'm going to leave that out now so that we  can just see the, the logic of the hierarchy at the moment.  then  below the central bank is the banking system which is holding currency  as an asset and issuing deposits as its liability.  okay.  again, so this is its reserve which are deposit accounts or, or actual currency  at the central bank, okay, and this is its liability, the private  money supply, the liability of private banks.  okay, and then, farther down, who is it  that holds deposits as their assets, private sector.  okay.  and they're holding deposits as their assets.  and they're issuing various kinds of credit as their  liability so i'll put securities here as their liability.  so these are just the same, same entities that i had the hierarchy.  and i'm showing the hierarchy of institutions now, okay?  and let me just put securities in here too as an asset, okay, because the private  sector is holding these securities in your pension funds and insurance companies and  so forth as well as, as well as  issuing them different individuals who are just aggregating here.  there are other assets here, you know, there's  loans here, and there is other stuff here.  but, and i, i'm even abstracted by the way i should say, the shadow banking  system, which is going to be a huge part of this course, is not here at all.  we're talking 19th century, gold standard stuff.  what i want to  draw your attention to, in this picture, is that  every, every word, every concept appears twice, except gold.  why is that important?  this is the, this is the difference between inside money and outside money.  outside money is an asset that is no one's liability.  gold is an asset that is no one's liability.  it's, you know, a piece of gold metal.  it's, it's, it's not, it's not a form of credit at all.  everything else is credit. inside money is some form of credit.  when people talked about credit money,  maybe they're talking about currency, maybe  they're talking about deposits, maybe they're  talking about other shadow banking entities, okay?  the point is that pretty much all money is inside money.  pretty much all money is inside money.  and this is why, this is this other psychological barrier  people have, that they're used to thinking of money as stuff.  okay, as an asset. no.  almost all money is somebody's liability, okay?  it's not stuff, it's not a heap of anything, okay?  it's somebody's promise.  it's somebody's promise, somewhere.  they're all forms of money. i should just indicate here.  this, this language here there's a very famous book from in 1960.  was published called money in the theory of finance by berly  and shaw, and they introduced this language; outside money and inside money.  we're going to be reading some chapters of that, of that book.  they were concerned about banking as inter-mediation about  the flow of saving to investment. and even which we won't be so concerned  about until we get to reading their, their, their, their passages.  when you read it, you will be astonished to  discover that they think of currency as outside money.  they define currency as outside money.  because, they're thinking, they're not thinking about  a global system, okay, they're thinking about  nation state. they're thinking about the united states.  and so, they're thinking that this is just fiat  currency, it's not a promise to pay anything, okay?  and well, in some sense, that could be true,  if you're not, if your not on the gold standard.  if you are on the gold standard, it's a promise to pay gold, okay?  and so that's why i'm making it clear by emphasizing gold standard here.  so, when you don't have a promise to pay gold, it becomes a little less clear.  what is the ontological  status of, of, of currency, okay? is it credit?  is it outside money? well, they treat it as it's outside money.  in this course, we pretty much always going to be treating  currency as, as inside money because we're always taking a global perspective.  we're thinking about this as a world, okay.  but this is a particular nation, state's banking system but  it's not autonomous, you know, they're trading with the outside world.  there's some international money that they  need to make sure their national money is convertible into.  maybe the price moves around.  it's not fixed like in gold but there's some, there's some exchange right  there that is, that is going to be important for our, for our discussion.  okay, so there's now, we've extended this idea a little bit from the hierarchy  of financial instruments to the hierarchy of, of financial institutions, okay?  
so, i'm going to talk today about some of the  incidents in that in that, in that series of chapters.  i'm not going to talk about the whole issue of the  gold standard, versus the silver standard, versus the fiat standard.  we're going to get to that when we do international monetary.  so i'm just going to put that aside.  i am going to talk about the national banking system.  and, so, lets just start here.  this is one of the charts that he has in the, in, in, in one the chapters.  where he's showing there, there sorts of, three groups of banks there.  new york, chicago, and saint louis, he says, are special.  they, they are required by law to hold 25% reserves.  and you can see, that he's showing their deposits 825 millions of dollars okay,  in deposits in new york, 262 in chicago, 116 in saint louis.  these are the main banking cities in the united states.  there is no central bank, at the time that he's writing this.  this if before the fed.  okay, so, this, so this is, this is, he doesn't  actually say exactly what date this, this, came from, okay?  but it's before, it's before the fed.  and, so they have deposit accounts, those  deposit accounts are liabilities of these banks.  to, to some extent, the central bank of the  united states was the collection of banks in new york.  you see how they have most of the deposits,  and we're talking about jp morgan and his buddies, okay?  and they're the ones who are doing international transactions.  new york is very much the center where the united states banking system faces europe.  they're required to hold reserves in lawful  money, and that means green pieces of paper.  basically currency.  at least for these central banks.  the, these banks in new york, chicago, and saint louis.  and you can see, that's how much they have, classification of reserve.  lawful money in the bank, 218 million, 66, 26 there.  and there's the percentages, 26.8% is in new york, 25%.  they, they are required by law, he says,  to hold 25% of their deposits in lawful money.  so there's a, there's a reserve requirement.  the second group, other reserve cities, so this is boston, this is  chicago, not chicago, it was san  francisco, other important cities, kansas city.  that also are money center banks, but not as important  as these other three, are also required to hold 25% reserves.  but they can hold some of their reserves as deposits in new york.  okay, and that's what that second column is there, due from reserve agents.  okay, so there's this sort  of layering, and then there's the country banks, okay?  which are small banks, 6,000 of them.  okay, the united states had just lots and lots  of little banks which are, have to hold 15% reserves.  and they can hold them partly in, in, in cash, 199 million there.  and partly in other reserve cities or in new york.  okay, so, that's 226 million.  so, there's the, there's this layering, where country  banks are holding their reserves as deposits in their local money bank.  okay, which is holding its reserves in new york.  okay, which is holding its reserve in lawful money, okay?  which is either a green piece of paper or gold, i,  i, should say, because it's the gold standard at this time.  okay, hierarchy, you can see that.  
and i want to start with the very simple case, of, of buying and selling goods.  so let's suppose, that you and i are the only people in the world.  okay?  and that you are making something i want, and i'm making something  you want, but these wants and productions aren't lined up in time.  so we have a problem.  i need to get your stuff, without having anything to give you.  you need to get my stuff  without me having anything to give you. so, so barter's not going to work here.  okay.  so one way we could arrange our, our lives, okay, is to have money.  [sound].  you can sell me some goods. so i'm writing minus goods.  so you, you had goods on your balance sheet.  and now we're subtracting them from your balance sheet.  and sell them to me, plus goods.  [sound].  okay? and i send you some token.  okay? in the other direction.  okay?  so, minus a cha, there's a change in my holding of money, delta m.  okay? and here, plus  delta m.  [sound].  not so complicated. we're going to start simple.  okay? that is, money, that's money.  but suppose there is no money, in this economy yet.  or we haven't agreed on it or something.  let's now think of another, another mechanism.  we could do this entire thing not with money, but with  credit, with pure credit, just by keeping track of, of accounts.  so i get the goods from you and i say, thanks for those goods,  and let me just write a little note to you indicating that i owe you.  i owe you.  [noise]  and that's a liability. it's a debt.  i owe you. and that is a.  i'm going to put delta as the changes in iou's, because we may have  already have iou's out there as well, and there's just more iou's now.  okay?  i owe you more, because i have these goods, here.  so this is, this course requires us to trust each other, and things like that.  that these are, these are iou's, and this might  be the sort of thing that you use with friends.  right?  like i'll pay for lunch today, you pay for lunch tomorrow.  that sort of, that sort of thing.  familiar with that.  but if we don't trust each other.  so that, that's the pure credit kind of system.  one thing i want to note about this pure credit kind of system.  which we'll come back to, it's kind of important, later on.  notice that the quantity of outstanding  iou's increases when we write a transaction.  you know, we're writing a new piece of paper that says iou.  whereas, when we did it with money, we're  just exchanging existing pieces of paper back and forth.  the money supply isn't changing when we, when we move  a piece of paper from my pocket to your pocket.  okay? but the credit supply is changing.  the outstanding quantity of credit is changing, when i write an iou.  so there's an expansion of credit in this, this mechanism.  so it's a little different.  'kay?  but now suppose that you know, we don't trust each other.  we don't know each other, well enough.  we're not sure we're going to see each other again or  something like that. so now, but we trust some third party.  [sound].  that's why i left that room in between these two.  okay?  and that third party, is willing to step in between the two of us.  okay? accepting my iou,  and issuing its own iou, which you accept. i'm  going to call this third party a bank. okay?  now i've used m, even though this is a liability of the bank.  and it comes from no where, it's, it's an expansion of the balance sheet.  so, just like in the pure credit economy, there's an expansion of the  money supply, there's an expansion of  credit, in order to facilitate this transaction.  'kay?  there's more money, because money is a form of credit, actually in this world.  it's a liability of the bank. so that's why it expands and, and  contracts as bound as, as the, the patterns of trade move.  alright, all baby stuff. okay.  but some deep and puzzling economics,  under, underneath that.  this, of course, is, is much more like the modern economy.  okay.  the modern, the modern, this is how modern economy, works.  okay, in, in a very stripped down simplified way.  
of course there isn't one big bank.  there isn't any in the united states, in particular, there's not one big bank.  there's like thousands of banks in the united states.  in some countries there's like five big banks  or, or something like that in uk or canada.  but in the united states there's just lots okay?  there's lots fewer than there used to be by the way, okay.  you, you remember when we were looking at allen young  and there was like six or seven thousand banks, okay.  there's fewer than that but there, there's still  thousands okay, of, of banks in the, in the united states.  some of them are very big and very important.  important and they're the names we, we've heard,  you know, citibank, bank of america, those names.  but a lot of them are small banks or regional banks or something like that.  how do those banks get knit into a sy, a payment system that is country wide, okay.  that, that it, that, that operates  as if it were a single seamless payment system.  so that anybody anywhere in the united states can pay anybody anywhere in the  united states if there's a mutually satisfactory  trade to be made, that's the problem.  so let's just make this a little concrete. so, let's think of there being two banks.  [sound]  bank a.  which has deposits of mister alpha and mister beta.  and we have bank b.  [sound]  with deposits  of alpha and, i'm sorry  [laugh]  that's not, that wouldn't be very interesting.  gamma and lambda  [cough]  and making these all money, money deposits, okay?  not overdrafts.  the overdrafts i'm now going to be focusing on,  okay, the credit element, is going to be inter-bank credit.  okay, not, not, not individual payers.  so we're moving from what we had last time.  last time, we were talking in a, in a world which was meant  to be more intuitive with you, okay, where you are trading with me.  remember, okay. but in the real world,  what, what the most of the important mechanics  are about one bank trading with another bank.  okay, they're behind the scenes.  they're in the wholesale money market, okay.  so that's what we're starting to get to now.  and elasticity in the wholesale money market is  what provides elasticity for us in the retail.  money market, that the idea.  so let me just explain  [inaudible]  .we could organize all of this as, in a money way, right, by having reserves.  okay, and any time, you know, alpha needed to pay gamma,okay.  there could be minus ten here, minus ten here, of reserves, there could be  a plus ten here, and a plus ten here.ok. that's one way for alpha to  pay gamma, is to actually make the reserves flow.  now reserves are important.  okay.  they weren't for the big, the big banks, even if it was a money system.  so this is kind of constrained, okay, because it  may be possible, may happen, you know unless bank a  has, has 100% reserves it may happen that bank a  can't make that payment, it doesn't actually have the reserves.  so not only does alpha  have to have positive deposits okay, but bank a has to have  positive reserves, okay, or else the payment, so this is not so good.  okay, this is a, this is, this is, more of a constraint.  okay, this isn't less of a constraint, this is more of a constraint, than the  one big bank that, that is, that is  operating on the money, on the money system.  so, banks don't generally do this, okay within the country.  
e., stigum, page 507 running a fed funds desk.  she says, the primary job of the manager of a banks fed  funds desk, is to ensure, one, that the bank settles with the fed.  that means to say, if you owe the fed money, you pay the fed money, okay.  every day.  and two, that in doing so, it holds no more excess reserves  than the amount, if any, that it can carry into the next week,  okay.  this second one is now basically defunct, okay.  it used to be so that banks were required to hold  reserves as a fraction of the size of their deposit accounts, okay.  and so they carefully tried to hold just  enough reserves, because reserves didn't pay any interest, okay.  and, and they, so they were carefully calculating all of that.  now there's so many reserves out there, that this  idea of missing your reserve target is ridiculous, okay.  all the  banks have weighed more reserves.  so, it's only the first one that is important.  and the first one is about, is about the payment system.  and that's what we were talking about last time.  so, and it's what i've always emphasized in this course anyway.  
so i've used this word a couple of times, okay.  what are we talking about?  okay.  so it's often abbreviated rp, some people actually say rp.  i like saying re, repo. so, you'll hear me say repo.  what, what repo is, is an overnight loan.  or it an be for term, okay, but it's collateralized, so let's  start there. it's a collateralized  loan,  okay.  but what makes it special, and we'll come back to why it's arranged this way,  is that it's organized, as a simultaneous purchase and sale, of a security.  so it's organized,  as a sale, and repurchase,  of securities.  which is to say, the person who is borrowing  money, or if you think of it as a loan,  the person is borrowing money, okay, is selling a security  to somebody today and promising to buy it back tomorrow,  'kay.  so the securities go one way, from the borrower to the lender.  and then they come back and the money goes the other way.  the money goes from the, from the, person who gets the securities to the person  borrowing the money and then it goes back the next way, ne, next, the next, day.  on page 534 it's taken, she has a nice little, picture about that.  the first leg of the, of the repo and the second leg of the, the, the repo.  will this, you can see, this is the  sense in which this is, these securities are collateral.  right?  because if i had borrowed money, if i had borrowed money, that means  i've sent, from you, it means you are now holding my treasury bills.  i gave you treasury bills.  you gave me money. okay.  if i don't repay you, okay, tomorrow, you have  my treasure bills, okay, and you can sell them.  they're yours.  it's organized as a s-, as a, as a sale and repurchase of securities.  so that's the c-, that's the sense in which this is collateral.  this is security for the loan.  that if i don't repay you, you have my securities, and, and, and  that, that is what, what, you don't have to depend on my credit.  me being a good person or something, you have something actually quite tangible.  and the other way is true too, okay, that if i, if you don't give me  back my securities, i don't have to repay you the money, okay?  so, that if you have taken these securities and sold  them to somebody else or gone bankrupt or something, i  have a free loan and that, that continues until you  can come up with the securities and repay, repay me.  that's called a fail, and a fail leads to a  free overnight loan, continuation, continuation of this loan for free.  so, it's collateralized in a sense on both sides, okay?  the money, the money collateralizes the loan of  securities, the, the securities collateralizes the loan of money.  
stiggim's chapter on this, is  a relatively recent addition but it, and it still doesn't really go far enough.  so i'm going to say things that i'm not  actually in stiggim, but i'm going to start with her.  so that we connect up.  okay, and she starts on page 212.  by talking about where a euro dollar might come from.  and her example is a firm like i better start to the left of this  because i'm going to have four of these. a firm like exxon  [sound].  dollars.  so she tells a story about exxon, which is a big corporation.  and exxon has an account at chase new york.  [cough]  chase bank.  and it withdraws some money from that account  and transfers it to citi bank, in london.  okay, so, from new york to london.  so this is a, this is a bank branch  that's, that's out of the, out of the country.  okay?  so, there's minus chase deposit  plus city london  deposit. okay.  minus exxon deposit.  plus exxon deposit.  okay?  this is the, this is what exxon is trying to achieve, okay?  how, what actually happens behind the scenes to settle  all of that in order to make that go?  what happens behind the scenes is that chase, okay, transfers reserves.  from its account at the new york fed. okay.  and i'm not showing the new york fed but we could do that too.  but reserves at new york fed. because it's in new york okay, its  fed is the new york fed. it transfers them to citi, new york.  plus reserves at the new york fed, okay.  and citi new york, acts as the correspondent banker with citi london.  [sound]  plus deposit citi london  [sound].  okay?  so the way that the movement of these retail deposits happens.  they're moving from new york to london.  she makes a very big deal, stiggim makes a very big deal in the book.  that no money ever leaves the united states, okay.  let's understand what she means by that.  what she means by that, is these reserves, okay.  there's a debit of chase's account at new york fed and there's a credit  of citi's account at the new york fed and in  that sense there is no change in the quantity of reserves.  there is just a change from the ownership of chase to the ownership of citi.  and nothing is leaving the country.  no reserves are leaving the country. that's true.  okay. but something is leaving the country.  okay.  this deposit's leaving the country and, and  citi, citi, and that's, that's money, okay?  so there's a sense in which money is  leaving the country.  what's important to appreciate is that now these  deposits that citi london has in citi new york.  are essentially reserves.  that, citi london cannot have a deposit account at the fed.  it cannot have, it's not allowed, but it can have a deposit  account at a bank that has a deposit account at the fed.  and so we can sort of have indirectly have a deposit account in the fed.  and that's what it's operating.  so it has these deposits and the way it  will, it uses them as money, the way it, it.  if exxon wants to transfer this deposit to somebody else, okay.  citi london uses it's deposits in new york to do that.  so there is this like layers of reserves that are happening.  got that?  now, this is stiggm's example, and i think that it actually  might be better if we don't think of exxon as  transferring it's money to a bank like, citi london, this is a branch of citibank.  okay.  so this kind of obcures a little bit what's going on because you might  think that the consolidated balance sheet of  citibank, these are kind of phony little entries.  you know, this is citibank owing to itself  really one branch owing to another branch.  so it's sort of just corporate accounting or something and  that really these are the reserves that are backing this.  okay.  so, so. it doesn't make the point strong enough.  so i would like to suggest revised version of this, where exxon is transferring its  money to crdit lyonnais, credit.  and crdit lyonnais  is using a deposit at citi new york, as its reserve, okay.  so its deposits is in another bank a different bank not its own bank.  that makes it much clearer what's going on  here, that this is a correspondent kind of relationship.  you're not going to consolidate these balance sheets and look through  them and say these reserves really belong to this deposit.  that's certainly not the way citi, citi new york would say.  citi new york, would say these reserves belong to this deposit.  right here. okay.  and that's it. okay.  so the, when we talk about euro dollars, we're talking about this stuff  here, that's on the balance sheet of banks that are outside the united states.  now we have this bank credit lyonnais, credit lyonnais.  it's a bank.  it can go into the dollar deposit business,  it can go into the dollar lending business.  it has reserves in its correspondent bank.  plus dollar loans, plus dollar deposits.  you know, it can make loans by creating deposits.  okay, and if somebody withdraws those deposits, it can use  these deposits in new york at, to, to make payment, okay?  so it can go into the dollar borrowing  and lending business, even though it's in france.  [blank_audio]  
i'm going to start with bagehot the title  of the lecture is the world that bagehot knew.  you've now all read bagehot or at least two chapters of bagehot so you  have some sense of this i'm now going to sort of do the economics of that.  alright. so let me start with a an example.  the world that bagehot is talking about. this is all going to be about bagehot.  it's all going to be about 19th century banking.  but it's going to be very relevant for what we, for what we do later on.  it's just simpler in the 19th century.  okay. so we'll be, be trying to move this stuff.  into the 21st century in the next couple of  lectures but for now we are in bagehot's world.  the world that bagehot now, we are thinking about firms  that are making payments to each other.  and the example that i'm starting with here is  that firm a is buying goods from firm b.  [sound]  and the example that i'm starting with here  is that, firm a is buying goods from firm b.  so you might think of firm a as a retail firm maybe okay and  maybe this is a wholesale or maybe a producer, maybe a  manufacturer you want to,  make it concrete. since  this is, since this is britain, you could think that, here, this is a, this is  a firm that produces woolen yarn or, or, or, or cloth or something, or clothing.  and this is a firm that's selling it.  or selling it on, later on in the production chain.  so, there's a production chain.  and these firms are linked in this production chain by buying and  selling intermediate goods with, with, between each other.  so, again, this isn't retail in the sense that it's you and me buying.  this is business.  okay?  and so it's going to be the whoesale money market again that we're talking about.  firm a is buying goods.  from firm b.  so, these goods were assets of firm b and it's selling them, okay?  and it's buying them on credit, okay.  it's promising to pay firm b and, and what it does  is, it, now it has the goods, it treats these goods as.  as collateral for borrowing.  so it, it issues what's called a bill of exchange.  as a dept of firm a, and  as an asset of firm b.  [sound]  it's a kind of trade  credit, okay?  it's a promise to pay in 90 days. it's a promise to pay in 90 days.  but it is very specifically referencing these goods, this transaction.  that's the point, okay.  the whole idea is, the whole idea behind this, is that  in 90 days from now these goods will be sold, okay.  and so firm a will have cash in order to make this payment.  but right now firm a doesn't have  that cash, and so he, he's borrowing essentially.  from firm b.  he is getting the goods but he is not actually paying for them.  right now, this is how all business  to business transactions work even to this day.  okay, people buy goods, bury promising to pay in 90 days or something like that.  and there is good, and there is bill receivable.  now firm, now fir, so firm a has what they want so fine.  now firm b has this bill of exchange and he may need cash himself.  oka?  so, the way banks enter this, enter this picture  at least at first, is firm b can take  the bill of exchange to a bank and discount it.  and so we will treat that as a  purchase of the bill of exchange,  and a purchase with bank notes.  okay. so, minus bill, plus notes.  so see what's happened here.  firm a has bought goods, and hasn't paid for them.  firm b has sold goods, and now has been paid for them.  he's got notes.  he's actually been paid. he's all done.  okay? this bank has made the payment, okay,  and now has a promissory note, a promise, from firm a,  okay.  it's now firm a that is supposed to pay the bank, not pay firm b.  in 90 days.  so the bank has an earning asset here.  now i said that the bank buys that bill of  exchange, the point is that it, it buys at a discount.  so there is an, that discount, a discount to face value  [sound].  so there is an interest rate involved here.  okay, so if the bill was for 100, you might buy it for 95.  that's an exaggeration, it would actually be closer, closer to 100.  and so in 90 days you earn 5% in interest, that's a  pretty good interest for 90 days, in that case, if it were  [unknown]  at 95. that's the way the discount here works.  so far, so good.  the idea of all of this, as i say, is  that 90 days from now this is going to happen, okay.  this firm is going to sell the goods, okay  and to some customer and get some notes, okay.  which it can use to redeem  the bill.  [noise]  so again just to be clear, this minus  goods plus notes, this is referring  to a balance sheet of some customer  that we aren't showing okay?  this minus notes minus bill, that's, that's these same things here on the,  on the bank's balance sheet. so this is the idea of this transaction.  this is the basic discount mechanism, the way  in which firms are making payments to each  other with the help of, of a bank that is willing to discount by paying out notes.  okay. now.  i'm, i'm showing the bank as paying out notes.  and let's shift our focus now to the bank.  i'm showing the bank as paying out notes so  that you appreciate what the danger of this business is.  and what the opportunity, and what the danger is.  the opportunity is, you're getting rid of an asset.  bank notes.  that doesn't pay interest.  and you're acquiring an asset, a bill of exchange, that does pay interest.  good thing.  that's  nice.  on the other hand, you're getting rid of an asset that is a means of payment.  okay?  and you're, and you're acquiring an asset that is not.  that, that only pays in 90 days.  and, and they don't have, nobody is promising to do anything for 90 days.  in 90 days, this will turn into cash, hopefully.  okay.  but until then, nothing.  so, there's a liquidity risk involved here, a payment risk.  this bank is, has deposit accounts, over here.  ok and if  somebody was withdrawing a deposit or transferring it to another bank you  know, this bank may need these notes, you know, to make that payment.  they're, they're reserves, these are the banks reserves.  so this could be a problem.  [blank_audio]  
so, have a look at the syllabus.  i mentioned just as i was talking there that  we're going to start with banking as a clearing system.  understanding it as a payment system.  you can see, we're not starting immediately there.  there's going to be this is lecture one that  we're having now, the four prices of money.  and next week is the national, natural  hierarchy of money, and money in the state.  and then so then they're, they're sort of several idea.  the two key ideas in the course are thinking of banking  as a clearing system, a payment system and banking as market making.  the third section there, international money banking is  just expanding that, because it's a global system, okay?  expanding those two ideas to the international arena.  and then the fourth idea, banking is advanced  clearing, this is how we bring in finance, okay?  that finance and, and forwards futures and  swaps and all these derivatives and things like that.  so that comes in at the toward, towards the end of the class.  and then we go back to some of these issues of  regulation, what to do about shadow banking, touching the elephant reviews.  this is about how this course connects up with what you  have learned in economics and what you've learned in finance, both, okay?  we're sort of straddling in the middle of that.  so, the course has these definite sections, and you can see  there's a problem set for each section to help  you get, get on, on, on, on top of it.  clearing, market making advance clearing, and also intermediation.  let me say one more thing about that. here's my chalk.  so i titled this lecture the four prices of money.  and i haven't mentioned the four prices of money,  so i better tell you what they are, okay?  the four, the four prices of money is, in a certain sense, that's  what this whole course is about,  is understanding where these prices come from.  economics focuses on one of them.  certainly the interest rate might be thought  of as the price of money, conceivably.  okay, one of them is certainly the interest rate.  okay.  the interest rate is the price of money in what sense?  it's the price of money today in terms of money tomorrow.  so it's the interest rate on a deposit account.  which, it's how can transform money today into money tomorrow so that  i think is pretty clear for most people with some economics training.  but there's a more primitive price that's important.  that gets neglected and we're going to pay a lot of attention.  and that, that is the price par.  this is the price of one money in terms of another money right now.  right now today.  so this is about today, this is about the future.  for example, you all let me write down this balance  sheet without any complaint, and yet, what do we have here?  we have deposit accounts money on this side  and we have cash reserves money on this side.  okay?  and, we take this all for granted that they're traded par.  that if you have an, an account at city bank that says $107, you  can go to city bank, and they will give you $107 of these dollars.  that's par, that's par.  and we see in financial crises,  sometimes par is broken.  that bank money trades at a different rate than  central bank money, this is central bank money here.  this is private money. so the system is hybrid.  there's private money and there's state money and that hybridity  is masked by par, you think like its just the same.  okay?  and if the system is working well, it is just the same.  but that then begs the question, why does it work well?  how do we make it work well?  what do we do in the case of a financial crisis?  so par is actually quite an important price.  and it's key to the payment system, okay?  if you, if you were if you were buying something from california.  and they said oh, because you're in the, you're here in new york.  okay, we're going to charge you an extra 5%, there's not going to be,  because there's not par clearing between, between california and new york.  you would be really upset.  okay.  but this is how it was in the united states before the fed.  there was not par clearing.  par clearing was created par clearing in the payment system, in the,  in, in the united states was created by a set of institutions.  and it is not easy to create this thing, by the way.  because this is like a fixed price, economists are sensitive enough  to realize that.  you know, if you have a price there, and now you fixed it at one for one.  and you're not going to let it budge at all, no  matter what the pressure is, that's, that's not so easy.  that's like rent control, okay?  so so we're going to look in that.  that's one price, interest rate is the second price.  the exchange rate.  so this is about the price of domestic money,  in terms of foreign money.  or about domestic money in terms of world reserve money, you know,  that there's a best money, we know that best money is the dollar.  this is particularly obscured because we live in the  united states, so we tend to ignore exchange rates, right?  because the dollar is the world, you know, we go to europe for vacation or something.  but the, but the notion that we have to worry  about the exchange rate of the dollar for larger economic purposes.  we tend, we never worry that the dollar  is going to fall below par with the international dollar.  the international dollar, which is the world  reserve, which is actually used for reserve.  there are two dollars.  again, private dollar, and the state dollar, okay.  and the international dollar is largely private dollars through all these  european banks with dollar deposits, and no accounts at the fed.  okay. how does that work.  euro dollars. that's the fourth  pri, the third price. the fourth price is the price level.  so here, we're talking about the price of money in terms of commodities.  economists often talk about that using the quantity theory of  money and v equals py or pt or something like that.  imagining that the quantity of money sort of moves  one for one with the price level of commodities.  we will come to some of that and understand what  might lie behind that by the end of the course.  but most of our attention is actually going to be on these on these here.  okay.  on these things here.  if you look in the, just preview of coming attractions.  if you look in the ft, usually it's, it's like two or three pages from  the back, you see a really horrific page  filled with very, very tiny little numbers here.  okay, and by the end of this class we're  basically going to know what all these numbers are, okay.  so we have interest rates, market interest rates, us dollar libor.  we have us dollar cds, we have us  overnight repo, we have federal funds effective.  these are all different interest rates here, okay.  and, and how they're connected to  each other is something we're going to understand.  they also have pound libor. they also have swiss franc libor.  they also have exchange rates.  they have s, interest rate swap rates, they have all of this.  we're going to understand all this stuff.  okay, you're going to know what this is.  and you're going to know it in language that you  can explain to your roommate. okay?  this is the goal.  that we can translate the ft into language that we can talk to each other about.  that it's not an arcane world.  that is, that is only for people who are partners in investment banks.  this is, this is something that the average citizen can and should understand.  in fact my whole inspiration for this course is the book lombard street that  walter badger wrote in 1873.  and i named my book the new lombard street in homage to, to him.  and this was the best selling book in 1873.  i hoped to write a best selling book,  it hasn't gotten there yet, but, but, but why?  he was trying to explain the money markets to his fellow  citizens in britain because there had been a series of financial crises.  and the central bank had had to get involved  and do things that they promised they were'nt going to do.  and he was saying they did the right thing.  they lent freely at a high interest rate against good collateral.  that's what a central bank should do to, to to solve a crisis.  and i wrote my book for the same reason,  okay, by saying that here we have this financial crisis.  it was a crisis of the shadow banking system.  and the central bank did a lot of things that we had never imagined.  it had sworn up and down it would never do.  okay.  and it did them. it's not over yet however.  in order to get out of the crisis that is,  that is overwhelming us, and it's a global crisis too.  we need to actually understand how the system works  and this means the population understanding how the system works.  so that we can get appropriate action.  because if, if every proposal gets locked up in politics  and it's like oh you're just in favor of the bankers.  oh, you're just against the bankers.  we don't make any intellectual progress, okay.  so in this course we will not be taking sides, pro-banker, anti-banker.  we'll be trying to figure out how the system works, okay.  and so that we can approach this as scientists.  as scientists and also as, as citizens. so once again i come  back, the world has changed. it's a global world.  and it's a global financial world.  the world of the 1950's textbooks is not a  world with private capital markets, very much at all.  'kay?  it's also not a world that's global, because the  global financial markets of the 19th century had broken down.  bagehot is a better guide for today than irving fisher.  irving fisher was living in a simpler world than bagehot.  bagehot in the 19th century, was living in  a global financial system organized around the pound sterling.  so bagehot is a better guide for today.  now, he didn't have fancy derivatives, he didn't have  cyborgs doing billionth of a second trading, you know.  he didn't have all of that stuff, that's new.  we gotta figure out where that fits in, okay?  but he would know how to start thinking about that, okay?  because he understood how money markets work, and it's just a  matter of applying that same way of thinking to the modern situation.  that's what we're going to do.  so the first thing is globalization following bagehot.  and the second idea is integrating in finance.  and the idea that.  this, this has actually occupied most of my time for the last ten years.  it's figuring out how to connect  up money and finance.  i showed you that picture of my books, right?  one is the history of money, one is the history of finance.  people think they're two  [inaudible].  they can imagine that because they're like separate fields entirely, okay.  but i'm trying to connect them up.  and i tried to connect them up in new lombard street.  and the way you connect them up, the way we're  going to connect them up in this class, is with this.  this is going to be our motto, okay?  all banking is a swap  of iou's.  a swap, and by swap i mean things like  interest rate swap, credit default swap, but also loans.  also all banking is a swap of iou's.  finance thinks they know everything there is to know about swaps.  okay?  this comes out of finance, derivatives, all of this.  we're not going to be thinking of swaps in the way finance people think.  we're going to be thinking of swaps in the way money people think of swaps.  there's a funding piece to this. there's a liquidity  piece to this.  and that liquidity piece is what's driving all the action.  okay?  and that's, that's what this, this is going to be about.  this is a course about money markets.  this is a course about liquidity.  we're going to connect it up to solvency and all of that.  absolutely, okay?  but we're starting in a different place.  we're starting in a different place.  we're starting where bagehot would have started, in  under, in understanding the, the money markets as,  as a, as a, as a system of clearing. as  a system of of finance. for,  that is, that is global. so maybe i should write that up again just  to get that in there. we're talking about financial  globalization, and we're thinking, what does that imply  for money and monetary theory? that's what we're trying to do.  we're trying to develop monetary theory for the real  world, for the real world that's around us now.  with, and the guideposts we're going to use are these  great texts of the past, because that's what i know.  but also these great, great texts of  the present, stigum and the financial times, okay?  these are our guideposts to doing that.  that's what this course is going to  be about.  
[sound]  so trainer conceives of a dealer, as  having a, an inventory.  that's what he's saying when he says dealer's maximum short.  and dealer's maximum long, this is the inventory, on this axis.  if you have positive quantities of securities, that's a long position.  meaning that if the price goes up, you win.  if the price goes down, you lose.  if you have negative quantities of this security, which is to say you have a  short position, then you're in the opposite position,  that if the price goes down, you win.  if the price goes up, you, you lose.  so, this is the maximum short position.  and the maximum long position.  and this is zero. would be very helpful if you put there.  so if you have zero inventories, the movement of the  price of the security, isn't going to affect you at all.  because you don't own any of it. so it doesn't, it, your not exposed, okay.  where do these positions come from.  they might come from your capital okay if your one of  those dealers that's funding everything with capital so you you you  can only you know once you've hit your limit you know  you you've your now completely into securities you have no more cash.  okay?  but more generally, it comes from your ability to borrow.  this is, you're going to see later on this is a very leveraged business.  so, it's your ability to borrow from a bank  in order to fund your, your positions, your inventories.  you're borrowing, in order to fund these inventories.  so, that's why i show their funding liquidity.  the farther away you get from zero, you're having  inventory, you're borrowing, you're borrowing to finance that, typically.  so, they're, the banker who's lending you money might say, i'm  willing to lend you this much, but not more than that.  so, might have that.  it also might affect, be affected by your own sense of risk that you  don't want to borrow more than that. okay?  that it's, you're afraid that if you get too  much risk given your capital you're, it's too much.  so, so, there's a number of things that go into that.  we don't have to pay attention to that.  the point is that there's some limit.  now, it's not going to be a hard limit, but we're  going to make it a hard limit, because it's a model.  we, we know, we know how to do that.  okay.  it's, in general it's going to be soft, but it's not  going to change anything if we just assume that it's there.  and similarly on the short side.  okay. there's going to be some limit.  i'm making it symmetric.  there's no particular reason that it has to be symmetric.  it's just prettier that way. so this is the first element.  the first element is these financing limits, okay.  the second element is this  outside spread.  [sound]  on the diagram there, he says, value based bid, is here.  and, value based ask, is here, okay.  what he has in mind there is that behind the scenes there are fundamental  forces of supply and demand and there are some deep pockets, okay, there's a  warren buffet in the wings, okay, so that when the price gets too low,  okay, really low, warren buffet steps up and says now i'm ready to buy.  okay.  that's the value-based bid. everyone knows warren buffet.  value, value investor, right?  so there, this is warren buffet here.  and this is the equivalent of warren buffet on the short side.  okay.  that if the price gets too high, i'm, i'm going to short this.  i'm say it just can't go any higher than this.  and i'm going to, i'm going to really plunge in there.  and, and so forth. now.  so these are behind the scenes in the sense that the dealer  is making markets in between that spread. and the dealer knows or has in  mind that if the price gets too low warren buffet is going to, is going to step in.  so that if i start to get, you know, run up  against my, my the limits of my ability to, to buy.  i can stop.  i can get ride of my inventory.  i can sell my excess inventory to warren buffet at this point.  so,  he is actually providing liquidity to me.  this is the liquidity provider of last resort,  [sound]  for the dealer.  now if the dealer has to sell, where, you know he's a dealer.  he's the one who's making markets.  he's selling to the value based trader here.  and similarly on the other on the other side.  so the dealer is making markets inside that spread and his, and his  business is being supported by the, by the existence of this outside spread, okay.  if he did, was, didn't know that he could get  rid of an inventory, he would be much less likely  to take the inventory, to let the inventory build up.  and, and, and therefore would be much less likely to supply market liquidity.  that's, that's the point.  and that's what happens actually, in a financial crisis.  in a financial crisis, the value based bid goes  to zero and the dealers say, whoa, you know,  i don't like that business, you know, i and  so they stop making markets and prices plummet and they're,  they're, they're in free fall.  so but in normal times, that's not what goes on.  in normal times, the dealer is making markets inside this spread.  now, so the third element, now, is what is, what are these lines?  these are the prices, this is the dealer's quotes.  buy, sell, buy, sell spread because at the inside or dealer spread.  this what you  actually see in the market, you know, if you are going  to your, your broker and your saying quote me apple stock.  okay.  he's going to quote you two prices; one for buying  and one for selling and that's the inside spread.  that's what your going to, that's your going to see,  you're going to see these prices in the market.  you're not going to see the outside spread, unless  you hit it, unless, unless the inventories make you  hit it,okay.  so, the question is what determines the inside spread.  there is a couple of things, okay.  that, that the trainer says. two things.  one is the volatility of the price.  okay.  so different assets, sort of historic volatility we're talking about.  if the price fluctuates a lot.  okay, it's an asset where the price fluctuates a lot,  then holding inventories of that is a risky business okay, you  could lose money and there's more risk if the price  is fluctuating and so you want to protect yourself from that risk.  and one way you protect yourself from that risk  is by having a wider bid-ask spread.  saying, you know, i'm, i'm willing to buy at this as long as i'm selling at that.  so you have a wider bid-ask spread  to protect yourself from the risk that's involved.  the other one is, is the other issue  causing the width of the spread, is adverse selction  what you're worried about as a dealer, you're quoting prices.  you're saying to the world, you know, i don't care  who you are, if you want to buy, i'm selling to you.  if you want to sell, i'm buying to you.  and the problem is, the person on the other side of that may know more than you.  they may have inside information about whether this stock is any good or not.  okay, and you don't, you're a dealer, you're quoting both sides, and so  you're worried about that, that if if the  person on the other side knows more then you  then in general you are going to be selling at  the wrong price and buying at the wrong price.  you're going to be buying when in, when in, when  in fact the price is just about to fall.  there's new information and the price just and you're  going to be selling when the price is about to rise.  there's new information.  so you're worried about, about the person you're dealing with.  and that's why the price, why these things  are are sloped the way they are. so i this is his diagram.  so the width here is about the volatility and the and, and what you  see the, and what you see happening here is that as you build up your inventory.  as you build up your inventory, you're only willing  to build it up more if you can get  it at an even better price.  that's the point because the higher your inventory the more  you're exposed to price risk, the more you're exposed, that  somebody has information about that this is really a lousy  stock and i get stuck with a big inventory of it.  so i'm really going to make sure, i worry about  that so as a consequence i ask for a discount.  you know if i'm going to buy from you. i'll, you know, i'll buy.  but, but you better give me a better price, because i'm a little worried.  i already have these inventories. i have these inventories why?  because a lot of other people have been selling this thing to me.  and now i begin to worry, they know stuff i don't know and i don't  have to look at them in the eyes or be a good poker player or anything.  i just watch my inventory.  you know, it's like the order flow is worrying to me.  there's information in this order flow, information that there's  a lot of people wanting to dump this stock.  maybe they know something i  don't know. and so you lower, lower the price.  okay?  so these are the three elements of, of, of the model.  okay?  the financing, the financing constraint, the outside spread,  and then, and then, the inside, the inside spread.  okay, so let's just now, okay, well  there's mark liquidity, i hadn't actually said that.  so, i'm making a distinction in this  diagram between funding liquidity and market liquidity, okay?  that funding liquidity is, is about your ability to have an, have an inventory,  that you then have to, have to fund with borrowed money, or something like that.  okay?  market liquidity is this business about, about being able to buy  and sell a security at a price that doesn't move very much.  and, and what it is, this model is sort of showing you that, it's more complicated  that this, as we'll see, but this model  is suggesting to you that at least security dealers.  are taking funding liquidity from banks and using it as  as a way to sell market liquidity, there are suppliers  of market liquidity, there are demanders of funding liquidity, okay,  in this in this in this position here we're showing.  i want to draw your attention also this, this is  a book for, if you happen to like the  [unknown]  or like that way of thinking this is a fantastic book.  it's very good reading too.  by larry haris called trading  and exchanges, market microstructure for practitioners.  you could use a book like this as a text book for, for our course.  it's mainly about securities markets not about money markets.  but all of the language, all of the concepts that  i'm using in, in this class sort of come from,  from reading books like this. and this is the best of the lot.  so i can, i can recommend that to you.  and i don't get royalties or, or anything like that.  it's really, it's really quite, quite quite, he doesn't talk about  money markets but that just leaves an opening for for me.  
>>  [crosstalk]  >> here's the trainer model.  okay, on the horizontal, instead of price risk that comes from  inventories, okay, from your positions, we're going to have liquidity risk.  the scale of liquidity risk that your taking.  [noise]  as a dealer.  again i'm not writing everything on here, but you understand this is  the maximum position and we leave in the background for a moment  what might be determining that, you know this is the maximum short,  you know, this is, this is, so we have all of those.  what's the price? the price that's, that's relevant here.  okay. the overnight rate, there are two prices.  there's one is the overnight rate, and there's one that's the term rate.  okay.  let's, what, what really is important here, is the spread between these.  you know, because that's the profit. right.  it's the spread between the overnight and the term rate.  the difference between them.  just to make things simple for exposition, at the moment, let's think of  this, the, of the overnight rate as basically being fixed by the fed.  the fed fixes the fed funds rate, the  fed funds rate through arbitrage is the same as  the repo rate, and we'll come back to that.  so, this isn't a distraction.  okay?  and we're going to come back to that today.  we're going to do, we're going to do that today.  okay? but, for now.  let's just focus on the term rate here.  so this is a term interest rate, is the price that dealers care about here.  term interest rate here.  right? now this is an interest rate.  the trainer model was about prices.  asset prices. so it's the inverse.  right, it's the inverse.  and so our bid ask spreads are going to be upwards slopping, okay.  and there going to be flipped, okay, as, as well.  so, we're, the model, is like that, model's going to be  like that. where we think of the dealer as quoting  prices, well, quoting, quoting yields. okay.  not, not prices in the money market,  depending on their on their current exposure.  so this is the bid curve and this is the offer curve.  okay.  they're, they're flipped because we're talking  about, about yields instead of prices.  but conceptually, it's the same. right?  we understand that for every yield there's a price, for every price there's a yield.  we haven't introduced anything else there.  we're just using the conventions of money markets that all prices  are quoted in yields instead of, instead of in, in price terms.  okay what this graph, what this dealer model applied  to money market is telling you is that in order  to, if dealers are going to be willing to take  on an additional liquidity risk, they have to be paid.  and, and what they're paid is this spread between  the term interest rate and the overnight rate, okay.  that's their profit okay.  now they could still you know, there could be  a run on the bank or whatever, but if you  give em a big enough spread, they'll say,  alright, give it a whirl, life is short, okay.  and they'll, they'll expand their, they'll expand their balance  sheet and they'll take more, on more liquidity risk.  okay that's what this model is sort of telling you, here.  alright.  the traynor model of bond prices, okay, says the price of  bonds is going to be moving around because of the net position of the dealer.  the net position of the dealer in, according to these numbers, is 515.  right.  that's the number that we worry, that we're concerned about.  we were thinking about the security dealers at security dealers.  the number we're concerned about when we're thinking  about them as liquidity dealers is that number, 942.  there's no reason for these numbers to be the same, right.  that's the point, that's the point.  that the dealer is making money on both sides.  and it's, and it's, and it's adjusting  the margin on both sides. it can change it's bond position, okay.  without changing it's liquidity risk position, right.  because it can, it could expand both sides, here, and here.  without changing it's liquidity risk.  it could change it's liquidity risk  position, without changing it's bond exposure, okay.  so you can, you can adjust both margins, okay.  and a profit making, profit seeking dealer will adjust both margins naturally.  so even though i say it's a gestalt switch,  you know, that one side from one point of view,  the security dealer is dealing in bonds and in the  other they're dealing in money, actually they're dealing in both.  okay, and they're dealing sort of separately in both, separately.  they don't, what they do on one side doesn't imply  that they have to do something on the other side.  it implies that they have a bond position they have to finance it  but how do they finance it?  they could finance it over night, they could finance it at  term, you know, there's a lot of things they could do.  i'm showing here a story about dealers, who we understand.  but this is the same story that you  would tell about banks, that we don't understand yet.  if we think about this as a deposit account and  this as a term loan to a company or something okay,  this same diagram, this same way of thinking, can apply, okay.  banks however, that's, that's thinking of a bank, as a kind  of security dealer, except the securities they're dealing in is money, okay.  the other side of a bank, is the payment system.  which is what puzzled us here. banks are  both involved in the payment system and in the money market.  we couldn't figure out the payment system thing.  okay. when we started.  it was too much of a jump.  but we now, at least, are able to understand, we  have a model of the banks involved in the money market.  okay so let's hold onto that we're making progress.  we're moving toward understanding how banks can  be thought of as a kind of dealer.  
it's sort of, 1987 is actually, when i got this job here.  for 25 years, 26 years, i've been watching that evolution,  and it came right before the crisis to a consensus, okay?  among all economists, pretty much, okay?  that the right thing, that what the fed was doing, and what the fed  should be doing with something called the taylor rule, okay?  that it should be moving the fed funds rate  in accordance with an equation of the following form.  and let me just copy it so that i don't, so that i  get it on the board the same way it is in the notes.  rho, r equals rho, plus pi e. i'll tell you what  all these things are plus alpha pi e minus  pi star, plus beta, y minus y f, okay? r is, is the  target interest rate, so we'll just say that that's the fed function rate there.  row is the natural rate of interest, it's a real rate of interest.  the return on real capital goods. pi e is expected inflation,  where inflation as you, as you know from the earlier classes  is the change in the price level, in percentage terms.  so that might be you know, 1% or 2% sort of now in percentage terms.  but in, in 79, it might be 15%, so, be a large number.  and then there's, and then there's this error correction term, in a way.  in, expected inflation minus  inflation target, okay? and output minus full-employment target.  that's the target.  so there's two terms here, one about prices and one about output.  and the, and the notion is that the  central bank is, this equation by the way fits.  if you, if you run this regression and  so you're, you're actually calculating alpha and beta.  it fits  the behavior of this, of central banks pretty much around the world pretty well.  not in the crisis, okay.  but in, in, in, in normal times.  so, it's, it's a positive description of what central banks are doing.  but then there's a whole literature that grew up to set, to  have as normative saying this is what central banks should be doing.  to stabilize prices, to stabilize output, to stabilize the economy.  and the key idea is this. that this  first part of the equation, okay? r equals rho plus pi to the e.  this is something called the fisher effect.  fisher, who's a professor at, at yale, and the idea's just that the  nominal interest rate is equal to the  real interest rate plus, plus expected inflation.  and so this is what the markets are doing themselves is the point, okay?  but the markets themselves are trying to  look ahead and think about what is expected  inflation and they're going to try and factor  it in to the interest rate they charge.  so that if you expect higher inflation it's only fair that, that you  that, that creditors get more, get more returns.  so the nominal interest rate goes, goes up here.  this is the idea.  now when fisher, whenever fisher himself was, was positing this,  he actually thought people made mistakes about this all the time.  and so a lot of fluctuation in the economy,  he thought, came from the fact that people made mistakes.  they got, they had wrong expectations of inflation.  and he thought that he could help them get better expectations of inflation  by using the quantity equation and other forecasts of inflation.  modern economics, okay, as you know, is much more optimistic about  people's ability to forecast and tends to think of these rational expectations.  that this is in fact an unbiased estimate  of the actual of the actual and future inflation.  and so this, and so the point is this is what the market will do on its own.  so the rest  of us is saying this is what the fed  going to do in order to correct the market, okay?  in order to lean against the wind alpha is greater than one.  okay, so that if expected inflation is greater than the inflation target we  raise the nominal interest rate by more than the, more than the difference.  you know, to try to really create  more discipline in the economy, that's the idea.  or if output is below below full employment, this beta is  the sensitivity of monetary policy to that, we low interest rates, okay?  if there's, if there's, if unemployment is  [inaudible],  okay?  we lower interest rates to try to get some more elasticity, okay?  so this is, this is, this is an attempt to describe in technical,  well in not really that technical, it's just, it's just a linear equation here.  the behavior of central banks, and then there's  a lot of literature, people make careers on this.  about you know, what is the optimal setting of alpha.  what's the optimal setting of beta.  maybe we shouldn't even have such a term. maybe we should have a third  term for financial stability.  so there's, you can generate dissertations out of  this, and many dissertations were generated out of this.  i already had my dissertation, by then.  and so i didn't write my dissertation on this.  but this was the state of the art,  and, and it came to be called inflation targeting.  and it spread all over the world.  and and then we had a financial crisis. so the,  this was a sort of economics came to believe that somehow we had really  mastered the monetary economy, so much that we could like argue.  you know, should this be 1.1 or 1.2 or  something like that you know, fine details of stabilization, okay?  and meanwhile, we didn't have inflation, we had  the great moderation and, and, and then, kerwhammy.  you know, we've got this financial crisis.  so, so the notion that if we just do  this, everything's going to be fine, nobody believes this anymore, okay?  this can't really be true. there must be more to it than that.  and so this sort of dislocation, you can imagine the mental dislocation  gener, a whole generation of, of, of young professors who, you know,  mastered all of this and they learned all their kind of metrics, and all of this.  and then the crisis comes along and, and it's  a little, they're a little destabilized by this, okay?  even, e, e, even now.  i was fortunate, as i say, that i, wasn't part of this sort of this sort of program.  and i did other things, and i was reading hawtrey and so  forth, and so i was much more prepared for the financial crisis.  then, then, and so, and you know, in the  land of the blind, the one eyed man is king.  and that turned out to be, to be me.  if you wait, wait long enough in one place,  the world will come right back around to you.  
to help, it really just now consolidate this.  i find it sometimes helpful to have, to use this image here.  a pyramid centered on zero.  okay?  so that we have assets on this side and liabilities on this side.  liabilities  on this side.  and these are measured in, in quantities here.  and we have money at the top  and credit at the bottom.  so if you just look, if you just measured everything in the economy.  if you went out and you looked at all the balance sheets.  okay?  and you just, whenever you saw currency  as a liability, you added something to the liability side at the currency level.  okay?  so there's these, these different, these different points here.  right?  gold, currency, deposits and, and then credit.  so the hierarchy is here.  you would wind up with a symmetric pyramid.  i am making you this, it's symmetric as if there's vanishingly small amount of gold.  which in fact there is, a vanishingly small amount of gold.  so let's just  say that gold is really even just in the mind.  okay.  there's almost none of it compared to the amount of credit.  the amount of credit is very large. okay?  there is a pyramid, of promises to pay.  credit, promises to pay, deposits, deposits promises  to pay, currency, currency promises to pay, gold.  there is a pyramid all the way, all the way up.  this image, i think, will be, will be helpful  in a minute, but i'm going to let it just percolate  there for a little bit. okay.  so this hierarchy is a qualitative hierarchy.  right?  we're moving on a credit to money axis here.  credit to money, more moneyness as we go up.  okay?  and more quantity.  so quality is here and quantity is here, is the, is the way this image works.  i introduced that pyramid for the following reason.  to now add a third dimension.  right?  we started with financial instruments, financial institutions.  now what i want to emphasize about the  monetary system using this diagram, is its dynamism.  okay? that it is a fluctuating system.  it's changing all the time.  okay? and at any time  scale you want to look at, by the way. okay?  if you look at daily clearing of payments, which we will.  okay?  there's expansion and contraction of credit within the day.  okay?  if you look at business cycles, expansion and contraction of credit.  okay?  if you look at the rise and  fall of nations, expansion and contraction of credits.  so at, at, at all time scales, this system is exp,  is breathing. okay?  it's expanding and,and, and contracting. and those expansions and contractions.  you know, that's the, the beating heart of the financial system.  okay?  i can depict in this picture like this. okay?  that what happens is in an expansion. okay?  is that the pyramid becomes flatter. okay?  and, and wider. okay?  that the amount of credit for given  amount of money increases.  this sort of, the branching ratio, okay, is increase in a boom.  irrational exuberance.  okay? and then in contraction.  okay?  it shrinks back down and it gets steeper again.  okay? financial crisis.  expansion, irrational exhuberance, contraction, financial crisis.  this is the nature of the system.  it expands until it hits some limits, and then it collapses  until it hits some limits, and then it goes back and forth.  and this happens daily,  this happens over the business cycle, this happens over the rise and fall of nations.  this expansion and contraction.  remember i said, there are two dimensions here.  there's quantity and there's quality.  so this expansion and contraction has those two dimensions to it.  okay?  in, in a, in a, in a boom.  right? what's happening?  quantities increase.  there's an increase in quantity of credit. increasing quantity of credit.  and then in a, in a crisis, there's deleveraging,  so called.  so it's, it's collapsing quantity of credit, both.  that's quantity, but there's also quality.  in a boom, credit begins to look like money.  it moves up this hierarchy.  forms of credit become much more liquid, they  become much more usable to make payments with.  and in contraction, you find out that what you have is not money,  it's credit actually. okay?  in a contraction, you find out that gold  and currency are not the same thing, you know?  that gold is better.  you find out that deposits and currency are not the same thing.  currency is better. okay?  all the way, all the way down.  so there's a, there's a qual, a loss of qualitative distinction between  money and credit in the expansion, and then a reassertion of that distinction.  okay? in the, in the in the, in the crisis.  this shows up in prices. okay?  so you see these credit spreads that, that blow out in a crisis  and then get very, very flat, okay, in, in, in a, in a boom.  we'll look at some of those, those prices later,  later on in the course, but i just want to.  this, this, i'm trying to fix in your mind here a kind of mental  image of this creature that we're going to then be studying little pieces of.  okay?  and if you don't have a sense of the creature  as a whole, you kind of get lost pretty fast.  okay?  because there's a lot of detail, technical detail.  and you, you, so this is the tree  and we're going to hang little ornaments on it.  that's another way to, to, to see it. it's the, the big picture.  
and the key to the civil war  is understanding that, the problems of war finance.  okay. what's the problem of war finance?  the government is fighting a foe and it needs to mobilize  as many resources as it can in order to win the war.  okay.  in this case the north was fighting the south.  it was a civil war, okay?  but the finance problems are the same, okay?  you got to mobilize resources, okay, so what the governments do?  okay. they tax,  they raise taxes as much as they can, raise as  much money in taxes they other resources they actually have conscription.  they say you have to give me your labor okay, for free.  you know, you're, you're a soldier and, and fight, and fighting the war.  so, they, they sort of require people to give them money and labor.  okay, governments do that. then they ask for some, some volunteers.  they say,  how 'bout we sell you some bonds? okay.  and, so let's start with that. okay.  because, and, and that's the next. so, so let's say bond sales.  how do bond sales work?  okay. so here we have the government.  okay, here we have the private sector  [noise]  and here we have the banking system.  [noise]  when the government sells bonds ,what is it trying to?  it's trying to say issue some bonds.  [noise]  as a liability, okay.  and sell them, receiving in return deposit accounts.  i'm saying deposits comma g, that is to the credit  of, that it can then spend on war goods okay.  that's what it means to sell bonds.  it means that you get deposit accounts here.  so it's, it's selling these bonds to the private  sector, which is paying with its own deposit accounts.  and i'm saying private sector because that's  its deposits, and it's acquiring these bonds.  okay.  so it's trading.  you can have my deposit accounts, i'll take your bonds.  okay, and the banking system, all that's happening is you have a debit  to the deposit account of the private sector and a credit to the deposit account  of the government.  so you're just tran, in the, within the, within the banking  system there's just a transfer of ownership of a deposit account.  okay.  this is all easy peasy, but, we start easy and then it gets more convoluted.  okay.  notice that the total quantity of deposits in the banking system doesn't change.  you're just changing the ownership of some deposits.  then the government spends these and in doing so it's buying more goods from  the private sector so it's transferring  these deposits back  to the private sector, okay,  and using them to buy. okay.  then instead of trying to sell them to the private sector, it might, sell them  directly to the banking system, okay, or by  taking out a loan from the banking system.  like this. so, lets say, this is version one, this is  version two, okay, plus deposits, plus bonds.  well, here we'll say a loan, instead. okay?  but a, a loan is, is sort of, like a, a, a bond.  it's a, it's a promise to pay at some future date.  but it's not a security.  it's, it's not something that's salable in,  in the open capital market.  and it's just borrowing this directly from the banking system.  [noise]  and this  is a swap of ious. right?  why do i say that?  the bank is saying. to the government i  owe you let's put some actual numbers there  150 million dollars because this is exactly what salmon p.  chase did.  okay.  in august of 1861, august of 1861, he went to the  big new york bankers and he said, please lend me some money.  they said 150 million dollars.  does that about do it? yep, that's fine.  so he had this loan of 150 million dollars.  so they created a deposit account for, for the government.  for, for mister salmon p.  chase, saying, i owe you 150 million dollars.  okay? and the government wrote a little note.  here, saying, no, i owe you $150 million.  okay.  the government owes, in ten years or five years i don't thing  young tells us the term of the loan, okay but this is a  [inaudible]  deposit, okay. this is, this is private money, okay?  and it's been created from thin air if you see.  it's an expansion of both sides of the balance sheet.  might call this quantitative easing.  okay.  the gov, the banking system is buying the government bonds.  it's buying the government bonds because the government is not  so sure it can get the private sector to buy them.  there's no involvement of the private sector here at all.  right. in this second, in this second maneuver,  okay, it's all completely a relationship between the  banking system.  okay. this is what sam and p.  chase did and then he pulled a a bit of a fast  one on the banking system okay, on these, on these new york bankers.  instead of taking taking these  deposits and transferring them to americans to buy war material, you know,  boots and cloth and food for the soldiers and stuff, okay, he withdrew them.  he said oh, these are my deposits you promised to pay me on demand.  okay, i demand.  give me 150 million, give me 150 million in gold, please.  in gold, please.  i haven't put this in the banking system, but  there's, there are gold reserves, okay, that are being held  by the banking system, and so the new york  banks had to do that, and they did do that.  okay?  minus gold.  [sound]  minus deposits.  okay? minus deposits  plus gold. a 150  million dollars worth. okay.  now why did salmon p. chase did that?  okay. they're not interested in dollars.  they're interested in gold.  and so he wanted to, at the very beginning of the war, make sure  that all the gold in the united states was in his pocket, okay, so  that he could, could, he could buy whatever he wanted from england and this  was turned out to be rather key, actually, to the success of the war.  the south had to always do barter deals, actually, with, with,  in, in, in terms of, with cotton, with ship cotton and get  war material from europe. okay.  whereas the north could pay in, in gold. so, this was a key, a key thing.  okay, however, one consequence of this was to suck  all of the gold reserves out of the banking system.  and therefore, make them illiquid.  make them unable to pay on any other deposits in gold.  okay, they, and so, they  immediately suspended, suspended their specie payments.  they refused.  to pay deposit accounts in gold anymore. the government took all the gold.  they didn't have any more gold. so the us went  off the gold standard. right there.  right at that moment.  because mister salmon p. chase sucked all the gold into his own,  into his  own pockets.  
so let me just underline this point.  the, the reason i'm emphasizing this point  about expansion of credit vs strict quantity.  this is about discipline vs elasticity, okay?  this is the concrete place where it is.  so you can imagine that, and i put this in the notes here.  you can imagine thinking about a world in  which there is a fixed quantity of money, here.  a fixed quantity of money and at any  moment in time, we can therefore describe who has the money by a point.  so this is time here.  [sound]  .  and there's a pattern of trade between you and me.  and it goes like, you know, like this, as we're, as we're trading.  that this is your, your money balances and this is my money balances.  and so,  [inaudible]  when, when my money balances are going up.  that's because i'm selling some goods to you.  when my money balances are going down,  that's because you're, you're selling goods to me.  but the total money isn't changing, total money isn't changing.  if  there's not very much money, okay?  then people run outta money, okay?  [laugh]  .  and some, some transactions that, that we want to make are impossible to make.  because you don't have the money to make them.  that's discipline, okay?  similarly, you know?  [inaudible]  if it were here. the pure credit economy.  we could think of it as starting at zero  instead of starting at a half of the money supply.  and similarly there could be some, let's see if i can copy that a little bit, okay?  this is 0 here in the pure credit economy. and let's just put.  and you can see that in this economy this is maybe my credit limit here.  and maybe this is your limit here,  okay?  that this is me borrowing from you, this is  you borrowing from me this is me borrowing from you.  on that.  back and forth and so, the transactions involve.  and sometimes there's no credit, right? here along zero, the credit all goes  down to 0 and sometimes it expands in order to facilitate transactions.  so, there's expansion and contraction of, of credit in the course of, of, of the  pattern of payments.  there's no expansion or contraction of money.  here there's just shifting from one pocket to another.  if we don't if neither of us is willing to lend  or borrow to the other because we don't trust each other.  then we could have the bank here describing this.  this is my limit. the bank is willing to lend me up to this.  but i'm actually willing to lend the  bank, you know, any amount of money, conceivably.  a lot more than you, you know?  i lot more than i would lend to you. so i can build up positive balances  very large.  and and the bank can do business with many people as well at  the same time so this multilateral, this multilateral system is a credit system.  so this is the first point to emphasize, and we're going to go into  this in more detail with actual instruments  and fed-funds and that sort of thing.  but understanding that the payment system is a credit system.  okay.  not a money system and that it has to be a credit system in order to have sufficent  elasticity to ensure that people who want to make mutually  advantageous trades are able to make mutually advantageous trades.  even if none of them have money at the moment.  they don't have any gold or the thing  that's fixed in quantity, the discipline thing, okay?  credit is necessary in order to facilitate elasticity in the, in the system.  and so when you go look at the actual  system, expect to find credit there. it's going to be there.  we're going to, we're going to see it. sometimes it doesn't look like credit.  
this is the book that the reading from last, for, for next week came from.  it's called, chapters on the theory and history of  banking by charles f.dunbar, and it's copyrighted 1891, okay.  so, there's a chapter in here about how  the checking system works in the united states.  this, okay, was the textbook, okay, that was used at harvard college.  okay. by dunbar, okay.  so this is what textbooks  used to look like okay.  and what students would go, they would  work their way through each of these chapters.  and so i find it sort of interesting.  what's particularly interesting about it is, there's no fed yet, okay, it's  1891 so he's explaining how a system works without a central bank.  and so he's talking about the payment system and the way the banks clear.  so, so, it helps us understand why we eventually got a central bank.  it's also  just crystal clear, you know, because he's, he's  been teaching this for years, it's a textbook actually.  no four color diagrams, you know, no supplementary workbook.  okay?  no powerpoint slides or anything and it's a beautiful little book.  you can learn a lot of banking from, from here.  and i've just included i think one chapter for you, for you to read.  but it's very much worthwhile. he was the first professor  of money banking at, at, at harvard.  he had been a journalist, he'd been writing  banking columns in, in the boston globe and  they hired him to teach, teach the boys  how to, about, about banking for their future careers.  so, this is where this book came from.  this is the second edition, and it's enlarged  with, and edited by owen w.sprig, okay, who taught  at harvard business school, as a matter of fact,  and was a very good buddy, by the way,  of, of, of allen young. so.  this, this continues my, my mission, to show  you something about the history of american monetary economics.  okay, this is a key text in the history of american monetary economics.  and it's really a lovely, a lovely thing.  
the survival constraint says, i remind you, that cash  inflows, must be at least as large as cash outflows.  or as, as stigum says, the bank must settle with  the fed, at the, at, at the end of the day.  the, so the precise institutional mechanism  that embodies that constraint is the  requirement to end the day with non-negative balances, at, at, at the fed.  now the, to, the importance  of this constraint, is, is maybe to get clear on that to understand  the way in which the constrain does not actually bind during the day.  so i want to start by talking about overdrafts at the fed.  okay?  so let me erase some of this.  when i was just a lad, i was a graduate student.  i spent a summer once at the board of governor's.  it was the summer of 1986 and it was a long time ago.  i was a graduate student.  and they were all worried about daylight overdrafts.  okay, so and they were trying to figure out what policy  they should use to, they were worried about the credit exposure  of the fed during the day.  now i'm going to show you what that's all about here, okay.  so what could happen, and it still happens, but so this, this  is an antiquated. here's the fed, and here's  [sound]  two different banks.  the bank a needs to pay bank b, okay?  because some customer of bank a is paying some customer of bank b.  but bank a doesn't actually have any reserves in its  account at the fed, cause it's already paid them out.  but that doesn't stop it, it can just run an overdraft, okay?  and that's essentially  a loan.  [sound].  and, to, to, what the fed lends to  bank a, is reserves, and it lends  them by creating them out of thin air.  [sound].  and it credits them to the account of bank b.so,  bank b is happy, it feels like it has been paid.  okay, it was worried about bank a, bank a  owed it some money, and it said please pay me.  but now the fed owes me some money, and hey, that's money.  so, it's different, i've been paid, i now have reserves, i've been paid.  bank b knows nothing  about this little arrangement, okay, that bank a hasn't in fact paid, okay?  bank a owes, owes bank, owes the fed money here.  and this is the grease this is the credit grease  that makes the payment system go during the day, okay?  that banks that don't have don't have sufficient reserves are allowed are  allowed to run some overdrafts on the balance sheet of the fed.  this all happens electronically,  fed wire, so forth.  but you can see how the fed might  be anxious because this is a daylight overdraft.  it's a promise basically to settle at the end of the day.  to come up with these reserves by the end of the day.  and what if you don't, what if you don't?  well, the fed has, has a what if you don't.  it says, if you don't, really, i will because i'm  sort of forced to, lend you that money overnight, okay?  but i will lend you that money overnight  and 100 basis points over the fed funds rate.  so i'm going to charge you a lot for that, okay?  to try to encourage you to clear your balance with me by, by the end of the day.  find somebody who will lend you this money at  less than 100 basis points over the fed funds rate.  got that?  so the fed, the fed, if it said you have to pay me or your dead, okay?  then the banks may say, okay, i'm dead, okay?  that's not and the, and the, and the fed is trying to protect  the payment system, so, it really can't say pay me or your dead, okay?  it says pay me or, or you owe me a lot more  money than you really want to pay, and, and make it, make the incentive.  now sometimes you can't find a counter party  and then they wind up paying that rate, okay?  so that sometimes happens.  so this is part of the payment system. these are, these are the, the overdrafts.  and the whole idea is that this is meant to collapse down to zero.  at the end of the day, by bank a  getting payments from somebody else and then clearing this overdraft.  but there's a credit expansion during the day  and then contraction at the end of the day.  okay, so this is what i was telling you about, how the system  works this way, at all levels of the hierarchy and all time scales.  and this is the intraday  time scale.  there's this credit expansion to grease the wheels  of the, of the payment system during the day.  this credit expansion happens, so this is the elasticity part,  this happens not only on the balance sheet of the fed.  but also on the balance sheet of a private clearinghouse called chips.  [sound].  do i call these bank a and bank b too?  yes, i do. okay,  [sound]  make this consistent.  chips is not the fed. chips is a clearing house.  we talked about clearing houses last time, so you know about that.  it's a mutual organization of, of a group of banks that  are, are collecting their do to's and do from's during the day.  and then they're, and then they're settling them at the, at the end.  what they settle in at the end of the day is, fedwire, okay?  so there's a private credit expansion as  well during the day that collapses at the end of  the day down, and you have to pay on fedwire, okay?  and you can have an overdraft on fedwire for  a little while, and then you have to pay that.  so there's two layers of credit expansion that i'm talking.  one is, sort of, the public one that's on the balance sheet of the  fed, and here's the private one on the balance sheet of, of chips, okay?  so the way chips works is that, every, every morning  member banks make deposits of collateral,  [sound],  of some kind.  so there's a credit here.  you could think of chips as a kind of a, of a bank.  okay, and then, if bank a, and bank a  may have spent all its deposits or something like that.  and so, it can borrow from the clearing house during, during the day.  so you have here the analog to this overdraft here would be  due to chips, it needs to make a payment to bank b.  so it notifies chips that it needs to make a payment to chips.  chips keeps track of that, due form a, and it tells chips that it's due to bank b.  bank b can put this as a due from chips  [sound],  and here due to b, okay. so this is  the analogous private payment system thing to what i was showing you over there.  chips is not the fed, it's not a central bank, it's a private clearing house.  and but it's the same, the point here to emphasize, it's the same elasticity  is going on, on the balance sheet  of chips during the day, intra-day, intra-day clearing.  and they're also worried about the credit exposure, because ultimately, if bank a is  unable to fulfill on this payment, all the members of chips are supposed to pay b.  because the whole point of this, is that b no longer has  an obligation from bank a, it has an obligation from the clearing house.  which is all the other banks that are that are members, and that is better money.  it's not the same as having an obligation to the fed, that's even better,  okay?  but it's certainly better, and so i can i can act as if i am  going to get that money and go on and make other payments to other people.  pretending that i am going to get that money, okay?  the fed is a little different than that.  these are, this is actual money.  so it's not like pretending i'm going to get that money, i have this money.  this is a real-time gross settlement system.  real time, gross settlement system, meaning, once  you have the reserves, this is money.  you don't have to wait til the end of the day, and net it off something.  it's money now, it's money now, this very  moment, that you get that electric payment, electronic payment.  that's not true of chips.  chips is a, is a, is a, is something that you can,  you can present at the end of the day at the clearing house.  and then, hopefully it will be money and it will be settled and on, on fedwire.  
would for an overnight loan.  there are trillions of these things, trillions, 'kay.  the, the, the flow is amazing and we're going to see why.  what are they used for?  the, the language of repo is a little. odd.  you'll, you'll see where its like doing  repo, or reversing insecurities, or repoing securities.  and it's not standardized across countries either.  you, when you go to london, they have different language.  they have the same instruments, but, they, the person who  is doing repo in, in the united states is the person  who is lending money. in london it's the reverse.  the person who is doing repo is borrowing money.  so, the, the language is not standardized okay, but  the balance sheets will tell you and keep you straight.  so, let's start with that.  it's important to appreciate that almost all repo  transactions have a dealer on one side or  the other of them, a security dealer on one side or other, that will help you.  stabilize that the language as well to have that in mind.  so let's have a security dealer here  in the middle, assets and liabilities and then on  one side doing business with with with a. with him is pension fund.  just as an example.  and on the other side is, let us say, a bank.  i'm going to always book  [noise]  when i put repo loan here, okay? like that.  if it's a liability, that means that you have borrowed money.  follow the money.  that's my, that's my my view on this, okay?  money is better than securities. so pay attention to them, to what's.  happening to the money in order to know which  side of the balance sheet it should be on, okay.  so a repo loan is borrowing money from a pension fund,  okay, these are the two sides of that transaction.  okay, the pension fund is, is lending  money overnight get some, get some interest.  but this is like a deposit account practically.  you know, it's an overnight, it's an over night loan that's  fully secured so it's a way of basically holding your cash  balances instead of holding them in little piece of, green pieces  of paper you hold them in these repo loans to security dealers.  and they're fully collateralized, you know,  there's a treasury security or something  that the pension fund has, as collateral for this, for this loan.  so it's completely secure it's in fact better than the deposit  account in the point of view of a, of a pension fund.  because large, large deposits are not insured, okay.  so if you're, if this, if this pension fund  put, put their excess cash balances in the bank.  okay and that bank failed, end of cash balances, okay?  whereas if they put them in repo, they have a  treasury bill as a collateral in case it doesn't get paid.  so it's actually a better store of cash for a large, a large pension fund.  okay. that's one side.  on the other side, security dealer sometimes instead  of borrowing money lends money and takes in securities.  that's often called a reverse.  stigham calls  it a reverse. okay.  because it's in the reverse direction of a repo  [laugh]  okay?  meaning that the money is going this way and the collateral is going that way okay.  and in fact throughout this diagram it's helpful just to have in mind the  collateral which is to say the securities is sort of moving in this direction.  okay?  and the money is moving in this direction. okay?  so the security dealer is lending money to the  bank, and the, and the bank is, is sending a security over to the security dealer.  as collateral.  the bank is doing, why is the bank doing this?  banks hold securities as part as their, as part of their assets over here.  and one way to fund that holding of  securities is is to repo those securities out overnight.  so you don't have to fund them by having deposit  accounts against them.  you're using the repo market, essentially, as the liability.  that is funding that asset. okay?  so, this is there's a lot of modern finance in the  repo market even though it's very ancient as a matter of fact.  and particularly in the united states the, this sort of thing existed before the fed.  okay, and it was the way that banks traded  with each other before the feds funds market.  the corresponding banking i told you, was one thing.  but repo was another, if you're trading with a  stranger, okay, not a correspondent, you want collateral, okay.  and so the repo market will give you that.  you, you, just have a bond.  and if you want and, and you, you say, i'll lend you money but you give  me this bond to hold until you repay me, and then i don't have to worry.  i do a credit check  with you. i just make sure the bond is good.  that's, that's the key.  and there were these big volumes of bond measures.  you know, this is where moody's came from and everything.  it was, it was to figure out, which bonds are good or.  what, how much money should you lend against these bonds?  that's where the whole thing got started.  alright.  i wrote down reserve here, okay? but really a repo, right?  you know the, this, the relationship between the bank and security  dealer here, is exactly the same as the relationship  between the security dealer and the pension fund here.  these are the same instrument.  okay.  but they come to be called different things.  and that just tells you that the security dealers in the middle of this market.  and, and they're different things because from the security dealers  point of view that's one thing and that's the other thing.  you know they're, they are, one is an asset and one is a liability.  so they are very different things.  from the point of view of the security dealer but  they are the same instrument once you are standing outside.  this leads to confusion so that sometimes the fed talks about itself being a  bank and doing reverse repo, okay, here and, and we're going to come to that.  what they mean is a liabi, a liability  they are going to be borrowing from the security dealer.  okay. but they also, they also actually lend.  all, all open market operations are here and they call  that a repo as if they were as if they  were here so they don't there they they use the  language in exactly the opposite way as a security dealer, right?  a security dealer when there when they have  reversed there, there, there a a they have  an asset when the fed has it reversed when they had a liability so it's important to.  [laugh]  you, you can get a little confused about this  when you're listening to street lingo, but not confused if  you just always try to translate it into balance sheets  and figure out, well, what are we talking about here?  are you borrowing money, or are you lending money?  okay?  and the fact that you say reverse doesn't help you to know that.  you, you, or the fact that you say repo doesn't necessarily help you.  you have to know who they are, and, and follow the the tune  a bit, a bit more than that.  
why is there, a eurodollar market?  well, there's a demand, there's certainly a demand  because the dollar is the world reserve currency.  there's a demand by people to have deposits  in dollars who aren't in the united states.  it's very common that traders in, in, i  dunno, japan and, and, argentina, you know, might be.  invoicing all their trade and actually making  all payments in dollars, even though neither one  of have has any offices in the united states, okay?  well, that's that's a reason.  now you could be doing this all through a bank in new york.  through accounts in, in city new york, okay?  but the fed doesn't kind of want you to do that, okay?  it, it would prefer, in fact, that you do this offshore.  it wants to focus on control of domestic credit, okay?  so there's this separate world outside  in the, in the international dollar reserve world, okay?  where people are using the dollar in order to make payments.  now, i've emphasized, several times now, for two weeks, that once you're  talking about a payment system, you're talking about a credit system, okay?  that the way, in order to create a flu, an elastic payment  system, it has to be so that people who are running deficits  have some way.  or borrowing from people who are running surpluses  under that's there's a credit element to that, okay?  so it's not just that every one wants to have deposits, okay?  in order to make payments to each other, they also want to have loans, okay?  they also want to be able to borrow and lend.  and from the point of view of  credit leyonnaise they actually want matched book.  they want the,  these things to be equal so they don't have any currency exposure because they  do all of their profit calculation in francs or i guess euro's today, okay?  and so, they would like to have to have a balanced book.  that there's as many dollar assets as there are dollar, dollar liabilities.  the euro dollar market grows up initially because there were  credit controls, capital controls, controls  of international flows of capital.  as, after world war two, enlarged corporation said, you know, that  might be fine for my pa but its not fine for me.  and so, they, they did business with each other in london, okay?  which is where the euro-dollar market sort of has its center, instead of in new york.  and it was a way of  evading some of the capital controls that are happening in the united states.  and the united states let them and in fact encouraged them to, to, to do that.  but eventually, those capital controls all broke down and  the market continued to thrive, and bretton woods broke down.  and your dollar market grew to be larger than the fed funds market, okay?  by, by an order of magnitude, very large.  there's a lot of trade in the euro dollar,  in the euro dollar market.  so much so, that before the crisis, there was some  thought that, which is the tail and which is the dog.  you know, is the fed funds market the market for dollars?  okay?  or is the or is the euro dollar market, the market for dollars?  and you couldn't tell.  and you couldn't tell because, you know, they traded the same rate.  they traded the same rate.  the crisis revealed, okay? there's a big difference.  big difference, okay?  the fed funds market is like the real market.  these are real dollars, okay? these are connected to the fed.  and the euro dollar market is a credit extension of that, okay?  in terms of the hierarchy the euro dollar is market is below the fed funds market.  the fed funds market is trading in the reserves of the of, of the fed.  so nobody has any questions about that, anymore?  i don't think so but there were plenty of people and i was one  of them actually before the crisis who saw the volume in the eurodollar market.  and i talked to the people in the new york  fed and they're worried about controlling the fed funds rate, right?  for domestic purposes and so they see the eurodollar  rate and they're like, you know, everyone they're dealing with  you know can, they big banks can all borrow  either in the franc-dollar market or in the euro-dollar market.  so, and you can't control, you can't control market.  so they are worried about losing control.  well, they got control.  they got control back in the crisis, okay?  because nobody want the euro-dollar market phrase up.  and the fed fund, funds market didn't. okay.  because the fed supported the feds fund market.  and everyone remembers that now.  
one.  i've shown, this is the extreme case where firm b gets notes.  okay.  there's another case, which i'll show over here.  let's just think about alternative relations between firm b and the bank,  just to introduce two other concepts here. okay.  so, let's just keep our timing.  so this is step one, this step two and this step three.  [cough]  and i suppose this is step four down here.  so, i'm talking here about ste alternative forms of step two.  so i'll put them at the same level here.  okay, still firm b is still going to get rid of the bill  [sound].  but it may be that the bank, instead of  paying out notes, pays out by expanding his balance sheet.  if, if firm b is willing to accept a deposit instead of notes.  if the bank doesn't want to get rid of its  notes or maybe it doesn't even have any notes, okay.  if the firm is willing to accept deposits at the bank, as a means a payment okay.  this is a way to do the discounting okay, without using any notes.  you can economize on your notes in this, in this,  in this way, if the firm is willing to accept  deposits instead of notes.  remember notes aren't deposits aren't promises to pay notes.  they're not notes themselves, but perhaps you would accept that, conceivably.  so this is a way of economising  on the note issue.  but it is still, it's still confronting the bank with some liquidity risk.  right.  before, by getting rid of the notes, well notes are  the most liquid thing, and now you don't have 'em anymore.  here you have more deposits, and this person, presumably they  discounted the bill, because they wanted to spend this money.  so they, they're going to spend it, and they may transfer it to somebody else.  now if they transfer it, to another customer of the  bank, no problem. you just do it all in your book.  right.  but if they transfer it, you know, to  france, you're in trouble, okay, because you're going to  have to come up with notes and there's  more down that road which we're going to see.  there's going to be gold, there's going to be all kinds of stuff.  so, but this, but, but in the short run, this can be an economizing measure  and, and you can see it's different from the notes, in terms of the kind  of liquidity risk, but it still does involve liquidity risks.  there's a second way of doing step two  [cough]  that involves econamizing on notes.  in this case it may be that firm  b okay instead of discounting says, you know,  also realizes the advantages of holding this bill to maturity.  maybe he doesn't need actual money right now.  he says, you know what, if i take it to the bank, i'm actually  getting paid less for my goods, right, i'm getting paid 95 instead of 100.  if i hold this to maturity, i get paid  in full, so there's an interest there and if i  don't need the money right now, i would just as  soon hold on to that bill as an earning asset.  but i better be careful because maybe i'm going to need the money, so  let me take this to the bank and make the bank endorse this bill.  so that they are, they're standing behind it.  they're promising to pay this bill in case firm a doesn't.  and that will make the bill much easier to sell if i ever need it.  so if i need cash, the bank will stand behind this.  and this will help.  it's not just firm a's signature on this.  it's now the banks signature on this.  and so that, that there's two, there's,  there's a separate thing called an acceptance.  and i'm writing that as an asset  of the firm and the liability of the bank. this  is actually a contingent liability, right? and  it's a contingent asset.  and what it is, is a, is a liability.  this is for the bank saying, if firm a doesn't pay, i will pay.  okay?  so it's a guarantee if firm a if  firm a if firm a doesn't pay in 90 days, i will pay.  so in essence, the bill becomes a 90-day bill on this bank.  it's like  a time deposit. right?  it's like saying, it's like you have the banks promise to pay you in 90 days.  and so this acceptance is actually you know,  physically the way this worked in the 19th century,  this acceptance is actually a signature and it  says accepted with the bankers signature on it, okay.  but, i'm writing it as if it's a separate little piece of asset.  so it was right on, right on the bill, the bill was a physical thing.  okay, with descriptions  of goods and everything, and a legal document,  enforceable in court, and that sort of thing.  and it was an acceptance.  you write across it, accepted with the name of the banker .  i'm writing it as a separate balance sheet entry, just to get us ready thinking of it  as a separate thing, because in the modern world, it is a separate thing.  the modern world, this is in early form of  a credit default swap.  if they don't pay i'll pay.  so, this also obviously is economizing on notes.  this, this second thing, this acceptance.  because it allows firm b to say, you know what,  i'd rather not have notes, i'd rather have a time deposit.  i'd rather have an earning asset. so, you don't need as many notes.  so, both, both of these things, the first one, paying out a  deposits, allows you know the bank doesn't have to pay out notes  because the bank the bank can keep them by expanding it's balance sheet and the  second case it's firm b that doesn't  doesn't require the notes, doesn't demand the notes.  okay, so the question is the bank is doing this as a favor or does it cost?  it costs something.  yes. yes.  i'm in order to make the balance sheets  simple, i'm not putting all the prices in here.  but just as the discount, here, you know, i'm putting  this bill of exchange in all these three places, okay?  but the price is different, you know.  when you're selling this bill. it's at 95 say, okay, instead of 100.  i said that, okay.  now for this acceptance, you're going to be paying, firm b will  be paying the bank some fraction of the total of the bill.  okay, it's like an insurance premium, okay, that you're paying.  it's just won't be as much as they would have paid in the discounts.  so yo, it's a guarantee of the final  payment, it's not an investment for 90 days.  so, it'll be 1% instead of 5% or something like that.  so, yes there's a payment, there's a payment there.  and this can be a profitable business, you know, so long as you are, are, are good at  judging whether firm a pays, because if firm a  pays you don't have to pay, and you just got  money for nothing, you know.  these are contingent liabilities, and so they may expire worthless.  okay, if firm a pays, you got money for nothing and that's a good business.  now typically, these things you know you know who firm a  is the typically problems that firms run into is not that  they that they are unable not that they just default on  something that there bad guys cause there known to the bankers.  its that they the cust they don't sell their goods  so they don't get the notes so they can't pay  so there's some delay in payment the typical problem that  bankers are worried about is not outright default but delay.  okay that's a liquidity issue.  
first reading for the discussion section is this reading by allyn young.  and i would very much encourage you to have a look at this over the weekend.  and i want to tell you a bit about this.  this is one of the guys that very much started me off.  that book i showed you about the history of american monetary  thought, the first three chapters are a biography of allyn young.  and i read everything that allyn young ever wrote,  and he really started me on this, on this path.  these chapters  that i've having you read are chapters he, he wrote, he'd never signed.  they were for an encyclopedia, and he wrote them in 1923, 1924.  so they were written at a time when the us had just come out of world war i.  the fed you may remember, the central bank of the  united states, was established in 1913, just before world war i.  okay. so we didn't have a central bank.  and we had no long tradition of thinking  about central banking in the united states at all.  in fact, americans traditionally are very suspicious of  central banking and it took at long time.  and we, we'll talk about some of the history he is talks about.  he is writing about the fed at a time when, when it is a new institution.  not clear what it's going to do.  he's friends with with the president of the new york fed.  and he's coming down and advising him on what to do.  they're inventing open market operations. they're inventing stabilization policy.  all of this is live.  so they're dealing with new institutions and trying to figure out what to do.  it's a fascinating glimpse.  and it's very easy to read, because it's written for an encyclopedia.  but he also compares this to the bank of england.  okay?  and there's this chapter on international money and about how england, well,  that's going to still be the center of world finance and all of that.  it's not going to change.  well, he was wrong about that. you know, that didn't really work.  we now know that, that was the end  for, for, for england, as the pound sterling as.  and we eventually, but we didn't get our act together to have the world to,  to have the dollar as the the world  reserve currency, really until after world war ii.  okay?  so there would be another several decades, a great depression,  another world war, before we sort of sorted all that out.  what's really fascinating about,  about the energy of this piece, is that, it, i think it puts  us in the spirit that i would like us to be in for today.  okay?  which is that we're, we've just lived through  this crisis that we don't really fully understand.  the system seems to be changing  [inaudible]  . we gotta figure this out.  okay?  just as he was trying to figure it out, in, in, in, 1924.  they're very easy to read, but they're very deep.  he's a very deep thinker.  and when you read this again, later as you're preparing for  your final exam or something, you will be more impressed by it.  right now, you'll find it easy reading.  later on, you'll read it and you'll notice all the subtle points  where he is steering away from minefields and being very, very careful.  so that's the first reading for, that, that i want you to, to do for this ov,  over this weekend in preparation for for the first discussion sections next week.  he's a big hero of mine.  allyn, allyn young. allyn.  
so there's an example, of a dealer, that has a long position, in the security,  and is therefore exposed to price risk, okay, that the price may fall.  that, there, and, and, and, that the value of  this stock okay, may in fact be lower than  this, and as a consequence you lose money, because  you have an inventory of that, of that stock.  the dealer business  is very competitive business.  there is a lot of people doing this and as a consequence there's a  lot of pressure to quote the best prices, okay to quote a narrower a  narrower spread and things like that. one way that  you can beat your competition okay, is by trading on much  less capital than them using borrowed money.  okay so that you can the profit on your  capital is multiplied by your leverage, okay so let's introduce.  leverage.  [sound]  leverage refers to the, the ratio of your  debt to your equity, of, of your borrowed,  of your borrowed funds to your capital.  just as we saw at the beginning when i was talking about de-leveraging  in, in european banking system was about reducing the debt relative to the equity.  okay.  so now we're talking about dealers leveraging up.  the dealer i showed you at first, i've  erased that balance sheet, was not leveraged at all.  it was all capital finance, right?  it just had inventories of both kinds, and that  might be this dealer as far as we know.  because we haven't really really talked about it.  it could be, it could be a capital-funded dealer.  but, they are no capital funded dealers or rather  the capital funded dealers are the value based traders.  the capital funded dealers  are like warren buffett, you know, you ask  what his balance sheet looks like and he's always  got, you know, 600 billion dollars worth of cash  waiting to buy a railroad or something, you know.  so, he's that, that's, that's him.  that's, he's making the outside spread though.  people making the inside spread, aren't doing it like that.  their balance sheets look more like this.  so,  [blank_audio].  a leverage dealer, with, this is, this isn't, again, quite what dealers really  look like, but we're building up. you could do this same business.  by having securities on one side and loans on the other, okay.  that's a bar, completely borrowed so your leverage  to the hilt, you have infinite infinite leverage, okay.  so that you're acquiring in a way your inventory of  cash is your banker okay, who's just lending you the money.  and you now have a long position  in securities that you're funding with, with cash.  so that position there, long position in securities, you're funding with cash.  and if you were on the other side of the market, if you were short the securities  market, okay, you would have you could list  securities as a liability and cash as an asset.  if you were, if you were running  this sort of book here, and somebody came  and wanted to sell securities to you, right.  you would just add, securities, and you might use those  securities as, as, as collateral for a loan from your banker.  okay.  so the fluctuation in inventories that allows you  to make markets, okay, involves fluctuation in the size  of your balance sheet. okay.  as you get more and more inventories you get more and more leverage in a way.  you're going to have to have some capital. to absorb fluctuations in price.  i mean, you're facing price risk here, so you might  have a thin layer of capital here somewhere but i'm, i'm  showing that the way you absorb fluctuations in price a, and,  and, and create market liquidity is by expanding and shrinking your  balance sheet back and forth, okay. okay.  this, this, this kind of dealer is exposed to the changes in prices of the security,  i suppose also changes in prices of the loans too,uh, on the, on the other side.  the question is are there any regulatory constraints?  >>  [inaudible].  >> well, so are there any regulatory constraints on how much  leverage you can take? there are constraints on  banks i think on dealers, i'm not aware of any.  typically dealers are, are, a part of a larger organization  that has more capital. so the balance sheet you see the dealer  has doesn't necessarily have much capital on it.  the volcker rule, okay, that is being implemented now, okay, is, is an  attempt to say banks, okay, cannot have subsidiaries that do this, okay.  that banks have to have complete matched book.  that is to say, they can be a dealer but they have to have net inventories  of zero.  so, just write volcker rule here, volcker rule matched book.  okay.  and you're allowed to have long positions in the  security and so you can have a balance sheet.  it doesn't mean your balance sheet is zero.  your balance sheet could be very large.  but you have long positions in the security, and you have equal  and opposite short positions in the security, so you have no exposure  to price risk, because whatever happens to you on the long side,  the opposite happens to you on the short side, and you're flat.  you're not exposed to price risk even though you're holding these securities.  that's what, what the volcker rule is an attempt to say, well, that's okay.  to have that on the balance sheet of a bank, okay?  because then they're not exposed to price risk.  they are exposed to other kinds of risk.  if you read my latest money view blog liquidity risk.  but that's a little advanced for now. let's hold off on, on that.  we'll, we're just focusing on price risk, right now.  so there, there is a new regulation. the, and that  comes from a theory.  that one of the problems that this crisis  revealed was that banks were taking so-called proprietary risks.  they were acting as dealers.  or they had subsidiaries that were acting as dealers.  and, and that exposed them to risk which because they had fdic insurance it  basically exposed the tax payer to risk and we don't want to do that.  so, there are some numerous regulations about that point.  they're not, as you can say, as you can  see, it's not so much about leverage as it's  about the exposure to price risk because and you,  it's actually kind of an interesting and deep point.  because a matched book dealer can be infinitely leveraged, but  if they're really, really, matched, then it doesn't really matter.  they're, they're not facing any risk.  they're never, they don't need any capital.  and they will certainly try to persuade  regulators of that fact, however, there's no such  thing as an ideal hedge, this doesn't really exist.  so, that, that's the problem, that in the real world,  the nice, the nice cleanness of our theories don't, don't work.  
a little quickie lecture about the evolution of american banking.  ten minutes or something like that.  so, you'll appreciate why this way of thinking is now necessary.  okay?  and it's not what was in the text books 50 years ago.  okay?  or actually, most of the text books even, even today  because they just inherited this sort of histories of text books.  i want, and, and this will help you also, i think,  to understand. stigum a little bit.  stigum, wrote her first, you know, she's, she's a child of an earlier generation.  i need a clean eraser here.  and for her, when she talks about banks, she is not thinking like this.  okay.  not at all, she couldn't possibly be thinking like this.  and, so i now want to give you an insight into she's thinking so that you can  sort of translate between what you're reading in  that book and what you're seeing in this class.  so, for her generation the understanding of  the banking system was as an intermediary.  between households and businesses.  [sound]  households and businesses and  the the way this is supposed to  work is this, that households save in  the form of bank deposits and the  banks make loans to corporations  on the on the other side here. okay.  so that short-term, the, the,  the, the banking system, is a sort of  janus faced, sort of person, okay?  that's looking to the household and  giving them the kind of asset they want.  a short term liquid money asset and it's giving  business the kind of, kind of liability they want,  a long term source of funds in order to  fun capital investment of the, of, for, for the nation.  so just say investment here.  this is investment in the economist terms meaning it's a factory or machine or  something like that, not, not a stock or bond here.  okay.  so you're financing the capital development of the country, okay,  by using, by, by using the money holdings of the households.  this is the, this is the classic, view.  now it may also be, the banks aren't just doing that.  they're also holding some securities.  particularly government securities.  and they may also be doing some wholesale borrowing.  okay?  and because of this, loans and deposits don't exactly move together.  right?  because if you have more deposits than you know  what to do with, then you just buy securities.  okay, or if you have more loans than you can fund  with local deposits, then you just go into the wholesale market.  so.  it creates some flexibility here, and these banks have  capital, okay, to protect, to protect them against losses here,  so that absorbs losses, and they have reserves, cash, reserves  at the fed or something like that in order to make payment system.  so this is how the banking system is, is, is is conceived.  and how it works, in a way, when she started writing.  just sort of wonderful life, 50s era, banking system.  but by the time i was starting to teach, banking, which was a pretty long  time ago actually this, this, this was already  was no longer the way the world was.  okay, but it wasn't like that yeah, okay?  it changed, changed bit by bit.  okay? and i was living through it.  so, i will tell you some of the things that happened.  okay?  the first thing that happened, okay? was the death of loans.  okay?  because corporations found out that they  could tap commercial paper markets cheaper.  they could get a better rate in a commercial  paper market than they could get from the banking system.  and so, they started to go to the commercial paper market.  and borrow there instead, okay.  the other thing that happened, was the death of deposits.  okay.  and that was because of this mutual fund thing that i just mentioned to you, okay.  from the reserve primary fund.  which is that households discovered that they could and  businesses too that they had deposits that they could put  their money into money market mutual funds and get paid  interest and, and, and so they left the banking system.  so their study to develop this parallel banking system, so  their parallel system in which there were say finance companies.  grew up.  and, and money market mutual funds grew up okay.  and these finance companies are issuing commercial paper.  and making loans using the, the proceeds that they have.  so, for example, general motors financing company is  issuing commercial paper and making auto loans, even.  you know to so it's, it's operating as a bank.  auto lending is no longer a business of the bank.  it's a member, it's the business of the financing arm of, of general motors.  and money market mutual funds are buying that commercial paper, and other  stuff, you know, as an asset, and they're issuing deposit substitutes.  these shares.  that we, that we mentioned here okay, so this is the death  of deposit space and this is the death of loans space so the  point is that all of these inter-mediation that used be going through banks  no longer was going through banks it was going through these non banks.  they were called. they didn't do, no, nobody knew what  to call it.  they started to talk about a parallel banking system.  was like growing up.  the end of the story, or it's not the end, but it's the most recent part of  the story, is a further evolution of this, okay,  which was the development of the shadow banking system.  okay and so here's the shadow banking system is the next evolution of this.  okay.  in this case it's not businesses that are borrowing  but households.  and they're issuing.  mortgage debt, okay, in order to buy their houses, okay.  this is the kind of thing, that normally you would go to a savings and  loan right, and borrow from jimmy stewart okay,  that's the whole idea, okay, not anymore, okay.  you issue this mortgage it gets packaged with lots of  other mortgages, and i'm going to leave out all those steps, okay.  and becomes a mortgage  backed security, a residential mortgage backed security,  that's held, by some entity that we're going to call a shadow bank.  this might be an on balance sheet entry, if it was  a european bank a might be a, a, a structure investment vehicle.  if it was a citibank operation we're going to  talk about a lot of this later on.  i'm just opening the door right now.  there slicing and dicing and  [unknown]  and stuff to make this whatever this shadow bank is buying here.  triple a.  okay.  and that's meaning high, high quality  stuff that it's, it's a quasi-treasury bill.  okay.  it's, it's like, like government paper.  and it's used as collateral to borrow in the wholesale money market.  so there's money market funding of this. mortgage lending okay,  for example asset backed commercial paper and repo.  and who buys that, a money market mutual fund, buys that asset  backed commercial paper buys that repo. okay.  and funds its position with mutual fund shares that are substitutes for deposits.  okay. so you see once again, okay.  whereas before, it was households holding  deposits at banks, that were funding loans.  now it's shares, that are funding mortgages okay.  but, it's passing, it's not passing through a bank anywhere, it's not passing  through a bank that has an account at the fed or, anything like that.  it's all non bank operations, and in fact  a lot of this was happening offshore in europe.  okay.  isn't that kind of funny?  a big european bank link union bank, union bank of switzerland or, or deutsche bank.  is borrowing in the dollar money market and using  the proceeds to invest in the dollar rnbs market okay.  and they don't use dollars for anything.  you know, they're in europe, okay.  but they're, they're doing this particularly arbitrage  on their own, on their own balance sheet.  or in a trust or something else.  it's this evolution, okay, that i think requires us to  reconceptualize our understanding of the theory of money and banking, okay.  because think about the shadow bank.  we're going to, we're going to really do this in the, in one of the last  lectures in the class, i'm just going to hint and open the door for this one.  what matters for a shadow bank, how do you make money if you're a shadow bank?  what matters to you is two things okay.  one is the price of your assets, the price of your  assets, and the other is the price of your funding, okay.  when we talk about the price of your  assets, we're talking about the bond market essentially.  these are these are bond like entities.  so we're talking about the trainer model.  we have a story about where the price of bonds comes from.  it's, there's some sort of dealer model  behind the scenes that's that's going on here.  we're talking about this price, your talking  about the term, interest rate, which we  now have a, a story of here too.  so this is the point, that the modern banking system is  a capital market based credit system not a bank loan based system.  and in capital market based system the  prices are both determined in dealer markets.  the key prices are both determined in dealer markets.  so we gotta understand dealer markets.  that's why we  have the economics of the dealer function in such a central place in this course.  [blank_audio]  
connect that now, to the story i was telling you last time about  the monetary transmission mechanism, because that's  what, i was telling you last time.  okay, remember there were three diagrams.  there was one we started with securities  market, the dealer market for bonds, then we  moved to the term funding rate okay, then we move to the fed funds market okay.  now i am just going to go in the reverse direction,  okay, because the fed funds market, is here, okay, term  funding, okay, is three months, and then the bond market is  out here, okay, these are the three, these are the  three sort of points of reference that i introduced last time.  let me just refresh your memory about what those things look like.  okay?  so we will start here on the left with. the  fed funds market.  and you'll remember that we were talking about a kind  of outside spread that was set by the central bank.  that we have the interest on excess reserves, and the discount rate.  as the outside spread. and that there is a upward-sloping sort of  bid-ask kind of line here. and so this is an interest rate here.  but it's an overnight interest rate, let's say,overnight interest rate.  i, i notice in my notes that i, i put on  the horizontal axis here, liquidity risk, when i taught this on monday.  and, and i put on the horizontal axis for the term also liquidity risk.  okay.  so let's, let's have two different terms so we don't confuse ourselves.  let's call this settlement risk, here, because we  introduced the fed funds market when we were talking  about the payment system, and talked about how  this allowed, allowed people to put off' til tomorrow.  you know borrow the reserves they need to clear  their payments now and put off payment until until  tomorrow, so so this is sort of all about  settlement risk in overnight and short, short, short-term here.  and then we had a second tier.  okay. where we were  talking about liquidity risk and proper  [sound]  which is the risk involved in borrowing short, and lending long.  or borrowing overnight, and lending for three months.  something like that. that was what he had in, had in mind.  and again we had upward sloping. and this was a term interest rate here.  not overnight. okay.  and then we had a third diagram that was about the bond  market, and here we had an asset price, the price of bonds.  and so we had a downward sloping curve, and here, this was sometimes  i put, i put inventories on here, so this is a long position in bonds.  but the inventories.  the important thing about the inventories is that  this is exposure to a certain kind of risk.  so this is price risk, here.  okay?  when i develop this, we started with this' because this  is the traynor model, okay that you've seen now twice.  okay?  and, and then i, i said, well let's then use that same thing to talk about this.  and then let's use that same thing to talk about this.  okay.  what i'm, what i'm worry, when we talk about the  transmission mechanism for monetary policy, we're going the other way.  okay? we're saying that the fed is fixing here  a target. fed funds rate.  okay? and it's trading in the market.  and i showed you last time how it's doing that.  it's doing temporary open market operations.  in order to make that effective.  okay? that trading, leads to a, a, a.  level, of settlement risk in the, in the economy here.  okay. which is the discipline element.  because i'm showing it to, to the right here, okay?  and and and or we saw now there's so many excess reserves, it's smack  up against, against the left, so that was total elasticity here, so it's sort of.  discipline on this side.  elasticity the more you go in this direction.  so this diagram is meant to help you think about the fed in choosing its  fed funds target is trying to choose how much, how much it wants to lean  towards making things a little more elastic.  how much it wants to lean toward making things a little more disciplined.  and that's a policy choice.  that's a policy choice.  the same interest rate is going to be, is going to be elath, cause elasticity  in some circumstances and in, and in, in a in discipline in other circumstances.  so, this is very much responding to the conditions of  the market but this is a way of understanding what the  fed is doing when it's picking off a fed funds rate.  [blank_audio]  that is connected to our understanding of the microstructure of the market.  and isn't just you know, an algebraic equation there that  doesn't seem to really connect to the reality of, of institutions.  this then gets transmitted. okay?  because remember here we had we had, there's a, there's a certain amount of.  of liquidity risk here, to a term rate, to a three term rate or something,  which is the spread between the three month rate and the fed funds rate, okay.  and it gets transmitted, also, to a certain amount of price risk.  here, inventories, i'm showing long bond holdings because  the dealers tend to hold quote long bond  and so the argument i would, i would make here, just a little spread around that.  okay, is that the if the fed wants to move the  fed funds rate around, what it does is it shifts the target  then also shifts the discount rate because that's a spread above  and it's going to shift this so it's moving all of this.  that makes, if it, if it raises the fed funds rate,  that narrows the, the, the gap between fed funds  and the term rate which the dealers aren't happy with.  okay.  so they raise their, their term interest rates so  that pushes upward pressure on the term interest rate.  that makes funding more expensive.  so, so, bond hold, bond dealers here don't want to quite hold as a large inventory.  so, that puts downward prices on bond prices.  so, the story i'm telling here is about a transmission  mechanism from the overnight fed funds rate,  to the term interest rate, to asset price.  ok, and those asset prices then influence the price  of loans, because workers backed securities are in fact bonds.  and, and so forth. and so the transmission to the, to the  real economy comes through the price of money here, okay, and, and and the price  of capital here.  the money market and the capital market here.  this i think is a clear, clean story about monetary  transmission that doesn't involve talking about instituions that no longer exist.  okay, like banks that are making multiples of their  reserves, you know, money multiplier ideas, stuff like this.  this stuff just does not connect up with  the reality in modern, in modern financial markets.  and so, but, and so, many people in finance even say,  they because i told you in finance theory and asset pricing theory.  of an abstract from liquidity in the first place, and  they just say, well, so there should be no monetary theory.  okay.  and i'm saying, there should be monetary theory.  it jsut should be focusing on how the money market works.  okay.  not, not on bank lending channel or something like that.  okay. that, that this, this channel  works instantaneously you know because when you, it  doesn't really require anyone to expand lending or anything.  because it's arbitrage relationships and securities markets.  ok?  so these, these things move you move  this, you're going to move the term interest rate.  you're going to move this, this price.  you may not move it exactly the way you want.  because there's a market out there that's watching what you're doing.  and anticipating what comes next and all of that.  ok?  but, but this is a transmission mechanism that i think you can hang your hat on  for the modern economy in which there is  deregulated banking and, and, and, and so forth.  so, monetary policy does matter.  okay?  in, in, in the modern world despite all that deregulation.  i'm not going to tell you what monetary policy should be doing.  you know, what we should be doing with this, because i don't really know.  this is what we have to rethink.  you know, we, the whole profession walked down this road, and it's not clear  that this is the right way to think about what the fed should be doing.  anymore, okay.  but we're still using that because it's what we have.  okay?  and, what i'm, what i'm, what i'm  emphasizing in this class is let's just understand  when we talk about the fed changing the fed funds rate, what are we imagining?  how are we imagining  that is going to influence the real economy or the price level or something?  and this is the first step here that i want to get you to see.  the transition, trans, transmission from the fed funds  market to the term interest rate to asset prices.  
[noise].  there are sort of two principles that drive the fluctuation of the system.  okay?  there's the, the principle of scarcity and the principle of elasticity.  okay?  the principle of discipline and the principle of, of of elasticity.  and i'll write these principles, so i'll call it the scarcity of  ultimate money is  one principle that we have to keep our eye on.  okay?  that the top of the pyramid.  okay? there's only so much gold in the world.  okay?  and it's scarce. okay?  and that's an ultimate discipling sort of feature of the system.  okay? but, contraposed to  that is the elasticity of derivative  credit. i'm calling  it derivative, because it's a promise to pay money, it's, it's, it's not  itself money. it's denominated in money, but it is not  itself money. that's also to get you used to the notion  of derivative so that when we start talking about  swaps and things like that you aren't freaked out.  you realize that we're already talking about derivatives in some, in some way.  these are the two principles and, and essentially this fluctuation at  every time scale is like a fluctuation from one extreme to another.  so they, so in a crisis, the principle of discipline smacks you.  okay?  and it says, nope, this is money, and this is not, discipline.  okay?  and in, and in a boom elasticity.  and it's like oh everything's money, you know.  and it's great.  okay? why is this?  it's because credit, the principle of elasticity  credit, if you and i. agree, make an agreement.  like i'm going to, i'm going to buy this thing  from you and i'm going to owe you for it.  i'm going to write you a little, a little promise to pay.  an i owe you.  okay? end of story.  we can do that transaction.  the scarcity of gold has nothing to do with it.  right? we're not using gold we're using credit.  so, individual people at the same level in the system, can't expand the credit,  [unknown]  credit without any constraint of the ultimate, of the ultimate money.  if they're just willing to do that.  if they're willing to do business with each other.  so the principle of elasticity is real in that way.  on the other hand  [laugh]  i cannot, by anything i do, increase the quantity of currency, you know.  that's above me.  i can't.  my liabilities are not currency. your liabilities are not currency.  we're down here. okay?  we can increase credit at our level, but we can't do it above.  now, if banks help us, okay, we can  [unknown]  they may helps us, and we can increase the money supply, you  know our credit expansion leads to expansion further up if they help us.  and if the central banks accommodate, that can lead further up too,  so there's these two principles, there's discipline at the top and elasticity  at the bottom and there's always this balance between them, and that  shows up in prices, and it shows up in, in, in output.  it shows up in the, the fluctuation. there's this shifting balance between  the ultimate scarcity and the ultimate elasticity, and that's a  way to understand the, the fundamental instability of, of credit.  okay?  that it's moving from one extreme to another.  okay?  and that has good features and bad features.  what i'm emphasizing right now, here at  the beginning, is that it has fact features.  okay?  this is the world we're trying to understand, okay?  and assuming away this feature  of it just because it makes the math easier, okay?  is, is, is not going to get us closer to reality.  it's going to get us farther from reality.  so we want to embrace this feature of the system.  front and center this is the way, this is the way it actually works.  this shifting, so this shifting  back and forth between emphasis of these two principles.  also shows up in monetary theory.  'kay?  somebody up, somebody yesterday last time, last lecture, asked me  what school do i belong to, or something like that.  what kind of economist am i, okay? what i want, and i was sort of unwilling  to answer that, or i, or i told you who my ancestors are, and that sort of thing.  what i now want to point out,  i had in mind, this, what i'm going to say now.  which is, that you can build a theory  of money around each, either one, of these principles.  okay?  so, you could have monetarism, in some sense, you could understand  as a theory that's built around the scarcity of ultimate money.  okay?  there's something called, the, the  currency principle.  there whole classes of monetary theories.  oops not currency price, currency principle.  [cough]  and, there's whole classes of monetary theory that build from the opposite side,  emphasizing the elasticity. banking school, banking principle.  okay?  this is where my study, as i told you last time,  in the history of monetary, monetary thought, sort of helps me out.  because i can see that there are these two, there  are these two sorts of beginning points in trying to understand  the monetary system.  some people start from here and try to then add up, you know, build up.  some people start from here and try to build down.  okay?  sometimes one of those theories seems right.  okay?  because we're at a time in the world where the scarcity of ultimate money is the key.  okay?  then it seems like monetarism is right.  okay?  sometimes we're not and we're in a time when elasticity is the issue.  okay?  and, and some, and this is true  domestically there's also, this is true internationally.  you're going to see these words later on in the course.  metallism versus chartalism, 'kay?  the currency principle versus the banking principle.  'kay?  this debate between these two points of view is forever, you know  in monetary thought.  it's all, there's always a debate between people who are,  are starting, approaching from this angle or from this angle.  and so just as i said, at any moment in time the  system is characterized by this balance, how much discipline, how much elasticity?  it swings and it swings but any particular moment there's a, there's a,  it's more discipline than it, it's more elasticity or the other way around.  the same is true  as far as in monetary theory. okay?  there are swings, back and forth.  okay?  that the monitors are, monitors are ascendant  when it seems like we need more discipline.  okay?  the keynesians are when it seems like we  need more elasticity, it swings back and forth.  okay?  and that could give observers of this  the impression that economists are kind of fickle.  okay?  or they don't know anything, why can't they  just agree which of these theories is right.  okay?  what i'm showing you, what i'm trying to  suggest to you, is that both theories are right.  these opposing theories are right, that they're each capturing something true  about the nature of the system, but not the whole truth of the system.  in order to understand the whole truth of the system we have to embrace opposites.  okay?  and understand that it actually has both of these dimensions to it.  okay?  that neither one has the whole truth but neither one is completely wrong either.  okay?  so that's why i'm uncomfortable about saying, ooh i'm  a monetarist, i'm a keynsian," no, i'm embracing the fluctuation.  the fluctuation of theory, the fluctuation of practice.  the world is like this, back and forth.  our theories need to be like this too.  they need to be flexible and adapting and thinking what is the issue right now.  is the issue that we have too much scarcity or is the isse that we have  too much, too much, too much elasticity?  and where, where in the system is it too much of  this, and where in the system is it too much of that?  and, and, and, and that leads to much more, i think,  healthy policy,  dialogue.  
[blank_audio].  you're not going to do this again.  [laugh].  the banks are not, are not going to fall for this twice, okay?  so what do you do now?  okay, the second thing that salmon p chase  did, was something called legal tenders, or the greenbacks.  and i brought to class today a, my own proud possession.  the top one here is a, is a greenback, okay,  that's authorized by the act of march 3rd, 1863.  it's not the first greenback act.  i think it's the third, the third one.  ultimately, they issued, they were ultimately, congress, the treasury was  authorized to issue $400 million worth of this stuff, okay?  these are dollar bills that say on the top of  them, this not is a legal tender for one dollar.  okay?  [sound].  and what that means is, nothing.  you, you, you, you can't get gold for this,  you can just exchange it for another dollar bill, okay?  that's it okay?  the u.s. is off the gold standard, it's not legal  tender, for, for anything except payments within the united states.  you're not, you're not allowed to refuse this  as payment for a debt in the united states.  so let's just now play this out, the second,  the second phase. and understand how, how this worked.  okay, so we, we're running out of room there, so  let's start here again with the same set of balance sheets.  we have the government,  [sound].  we have the private sector,  [sound].  we have the private sector,  [sound].  and we have the, banking system,  [sound].  young is, by the way, in these passages drawing heavily  on the work of his, of his friend, wesley clair mitchell.  who wrote a great book called the greenbacks, about this whole period.  which i've assigned sometimes in, in, not in this class  but in, but in other classes, where we're reading great text.  wesley clair mitchell, i see no recognition of this name at all, okay?  but, he was very famous professor here at columbia.  and he taught, he taught here for many,  many decades.  okay, and he was a, a, he was basically one of, one of alan young's best friends.  they grew up, they grew up together and went  to, went to graduate school together and so forth.  so he's leaning on the historical research and quantitative research.  wesley clair mitchell was one of the, one of the founders of national bureau  of economic research as a matter of fact, which is a big, big deal here.  a big american institutionalist, quantitative economist.  okay, that's just in the side. so, how does the legal tenders work?  legal tenders work this way, okay, that the government  is the is buying more goods from the private sector  [sound],  for legal tenders. it's just giving theme these pieces of  paper here and i'll write that number 400 million.  there were not actually 400 million ever totally issued, but almost  400 million were issued, so it's a lot of money there.  okay, that's what the private sect, so the private sector is accepting  this in payment.  and the, and the government is getting the war goods  so the government gets war goods here as its own asset.  and it is printing these legal tenders here.  [sound].  okay, young is pretty aghast at this.  you can see in this, in this in this article.  governments under pressure.  if you're fighting a war, you do what it takes to win the war, okay?  so, and he appreciates that, but you'll see there's a, there's a better way  to do this, which is which we're going to come to in the third one.  [cough].  probably salmon p chase underestimated the bond market, at at this time.  but he, so he starts to print money, and what happens to  these legal tenders, is that they get deposited in the banking system.  or some of them because the banking system still exists.  so, i'm going to say just for example here, so, this is stage one.  that the private sector is taking this  $400 million worth of, worth of, of greenbacks.  and they deposit $100 million  [sound]  in the bank  [sound],  okay?  [sound].  okay, they  deposit  it in the  bank. the legal  tenders then become the asset of the banking system, and it's the legal tenders  that become the reserves of the banking system.  so that if somebody is withdrawing their deposit, they're withdrawing  their deposit not in gold, but in these legal tenders.  essentially, what salmon p chase did in the hierarchy of money was to  insert this sort of, legal tender money in between gold and deposits, okay?  to insert it at the top of the u.s. hierarchy, okay?  and, as a way,  as a form of war finance, 400, 400 million, $400 million here.  okay, this had, you could never use these legal  tenders, by the way, to buy, foreign war goods.  okay, that's what the gold was for, okay?  this is to buy domestic war goods, okay?  foreigners, if you, if you try to, use, use, legal tenders to buy things.  they're going to  say well, but what's the gold value of these legal tenders?  let me, let me trade this for gold, and so he makes a big deal  that throughout the war, the value of  these legal tenders kept falling relative to gold.  okay, and they eventually fell to $.50 on  the dollar, so that there was, there was this  exchange rate effect through the falling value of  the, through the falling value of the dollar internationally.  there's also domestic inflation. the price  level is rising domestically as a consequence of this too.  because the government is basically buying things  without making anyone else buy anything less, okay?  so, it's not, whereas here, when you're ex, when you're saying,  i'm going to give you a bond, you're going to give my your deposits.  you're reducing the purchasing power of the private sector.  here, here, you're just adding purchasing power, that didn't exist before,  okay?  and the consequence of this is to depreciate the  value of these legal tenders relative to the pre-war, par.  
>> this is the, this is hyman minsky's magnum  opus, stabilizing an unstable economy twentieth century fund report 1986.  he worked on this for a very long time.  and i just want to read a little passage here.  on page 198. okay.  so.  he says, and we're going to take this point of view throughout this course.  so, that's why i'm taking the time quote it here.  he says, to analyze how financial commitments effect the economy, it is  necessary to look at economic units in terms of their cash flows.  the cash flow approach looks at all units, be they  households, corporations, state and municipal  governments, or even national governments.  as if they were banks,  as if they were banks. what does that mean?  that means, thinking of each, of every unit, every  different kind of unit, as a money flow operation.  there's cash in, cash out. cash flow in, cash flow out.  so that, you know, not so much paying attention to the goods part, okay.  but paying attention.  to the money flow, the money flow part, okay.  in urging this minsky is pushing a macro  economic per, perception that is from copeland which we're going to come to  in a minute but i want to focus on the micro economic piece first.  because, we can, we can build it up from our own, our own intuitions okay.  from micro economic point of view, the key consequence of taking a money flow  point of view is to put pressure, put cum em, emphasis on something called let  me call this survival constraint.  or, in other words, the reserve constraint.  that ultimately,  your problem.  okay, is not a budget-constraint problem.  it's not like economists think.  it's certainly not an inter-temporal  budget constraint problem like economists think,  okay?  it's a liquidity constraint problem that you need every period.  you need to have some kind of means of payment.  you need cash inflow, equal or greater than your cash outflow.  or else you cant, you cant make the cash outflow.  so there's an issue of balance between cash inflow and cash outflow.  and in particular, cash inflow greater  than your cash commitments, promises you've made to make  payments, promises you've made, for example, to repay debts okay.  if you can't repay your debts with the cash that's  coming in, okay, then you default, and you do not survive.  it doesn't matter if you have lots of wealth, if you have no cash.  if you can't pay the debt, then you default, and you are out of business.  this is the liquidity constraint. liquidity kills you quick.  you'll hear that more than once in this class.  solvency.  as a bank you can go on for a  long time, okay, doing business even if you are insolvent.  many banks do.  you cannot survive for one day if you are illiquid.  okay.  and so from, if we adopt the point of view that everyone is a bank, okay.  this is the thing that focuses the  mind, okay.  it's the liquidity constraint okay, not the, not the budget constraint.  
correspondent banking.  so let's just think about bank a by itself.  assets and liabilities. and the the first thing this bank can do.  you know, there's lots of people who have deposit accounts in bank a.  there's people who have deposit accounts in bank b and bank c and so forth.  and they are transferring them to each other.  they're making payments with checks.  okay. what is a check?  a check is an order to pay.  okay. so the bank  is receiving throughout the day varioius orders to  pay, okay and it isn't paying any of them.  it's just collecting them.  okay?  it's stacking' em up, and keeping, and keeping track of them.  and so, and then.  it, it, and it, and it sorts them by pay who.  not alpha, beta, gamma, lambda.  but bank a, b, c, d. it just cares  about the interbank. let, you know, once it gets to bank b.  let them give it to lambda. i'm not going to worry about that.  i'm just paying, for me this order to pay is an order to pay bank b.  notice on the bottom of your checks, there's this little tracking number.  that's, that's, that's what that's for.  that's saying where, which bank are we supposed to send this to?  and then there's an account number and that's just the problem of your own bank.  okay?  they're not there. they don't care about that.  so, bank a is collecting  these and it collects them all. i'll put a little summation sign.  so, due to customers of bank a. that's it's own bank.  okay? and due from.  customers  [sound]  of bank a.  and so these are people in bank a who are paying people in bank b, bank a.  no problem.  there's no need for reserve flows, okay? so the net,  [sound]  which we'll put here as a memo item over here, is going to be zero, okay?  but i'm just putting that there to start getting the idea.  [cough]  keep track of. other checks due to bank b.  okay, so there's, there's somebody in a who's  paid somebody with an account in bank b.  and that creates an obligation of bank a to pay bank b.  okay, so that you, you calculate all of these things.  you add them all up due to b.  due from b, okay due to c,  due to d, due  from c, due  from d. okay.  and then, at the end of the day, you have a net.  now, some of these nets may  be positive. some of these nets may be negative, okay?  there may be more payments coming in on one  side and more payments coming in on the other.  okay?  the corresponding balance piece, where going to, where going to get to  some, something about that positive-negative  thing later on with clearing houses.  but let's just do correspondent banking first.  the point is, this is a payment system. and these banks  are just used to paying each other, okay? so bank a and bank b.  you know some days there's a net pay in one  direction, some days there's a net pay in the other direction.  there are payments going back and forth.  they're used to each other, these banks are meeting at the end of the day and, and  clearing accounts. okay, they could clear in reserves, okay.  as we, as we saw.  so they're, they're doing some netting already, right, just  saying what do i owe you on net, that's good.  so, we're not moving reserves back and forth across the  street every day, you know, that would be a pain.  we're just maybe moving the net but we  can do better than that with corresponded balances.  okay. think about bank a and bank b.  if they do regular business to each other,  with each other, they could just swap ious right now.  bank a could say, well, let me just put a deposit in b.  in my own name.  my own name, not some customer. banker's balances, okay?  and so that's a liability of bank b.  [noise]  deposit from a, to be clear what that is.  and instead of making a deposit by chain, by transferring reserves, which will be  one way you just, you just match it with a deposit going the other way.  okay so here's a deposit  in a. and here is the deposit  from b, okay? this is a swap of iou's.  we're going to see a lot of this sort of thing in this course.  this is a swap of iou's.  bank a is saying i owe you $1,000, okay bank b is saying, no i owe you $1,000.  they both owe each other $1,000, so  they've created these deposits from thin air,  they're just a swap of iou's, they've  expanded their balance sheets, both of them.  how can that possibly do anything?  you know, there's no such thing as a free lunch.  it seems like it couldn't possibly do anything.  but it does.  okay. because that means that if a needs to pay  b, a needs to pay b, okay, they can do it, okay, by just using their deposit in b.  right?  so one way to make a net payment here is just to draw  this down.  okay? and if we need to, you know, have  it, so here's the deposit of, of lambda. okay.  so, to transfer $10 from, from alpha to lambda.  it just involves crediting  lambda's account here and debiting  alpha's account here. okay?  and you're debiting this one. okay?  so you're debiting this account here, you're debiting this, so the,  bank a's balance sheet shrinks in this, in this model here.  and bank b's balance sheet stays the same, okay.  because it's just swapping an, an iou from  a for an i, iou, from lambda. so, it's just moving between accounts.  so, one way to make, and, and no reserves would need to travel.  this is the point. no reserves need to travel.  so, if, if there's a, a balance that fluctuates from day to day.  okay?  you can just sort of keep track of it by, with these deposits here.  in this, in this way. that's one way to make the, to make  this happen. okay?  there's another way, though, to swap  [inaudible]  use. okay?  there's another way.  okay.  again we need to somehow move this, you know, this, this alpha's account  is getting debited by ten, lender's account  is getting, is getting credited by ten.  what other way could we do it?  another way, is, we could increase the deposits.  here, increase the liabilities of bank a to b.  okay.  increase the liabilities here. okay.  in this case, this balance sheet plus 10  minus 10 doesn't move, this balance sheet expands.  right.  so there's two different possibilities, two different ways to alpha  to pay beta, alpha to pay, pay lambda, two different ways.  one, one is by a shrinking of the balance sheet of the, of the debtor bank.  the other is by an expansion of the balance sheet of the creditor bank.  okay, two different, these are just logical possibilities  right now, both of them are involving credit.  okay, which one gets picked?  okay, iin the corresponding banking system quite  typically there's a hirarchy of banks, okay.  and the big powerful city banks you know, in the, in the urban centers.  say, you know what?  i don't really have any reason to put deposits in you,  little country bank. you put a deposit in me, okay?  and you pay me in reserves, maybe up front.  or i'll lend you the money or something. and you pay me money for this.  but we will use my deposits as clearing, as clearing balances, thank you very much.  and so, there's a hierarchy there.  okay?  that it, that is is going to be, that,  and that's, you can see how that's a discipline thing.  it's a discipline  thing for the debtor bank. right?  the, the debt, the, the, the bank that's in the countryside basically has to have  an account with the, with an urban bank in order to join the payment system.  okay?  and it has to maintain deposits there.  okay, if it runs out there's no guarantee that bank b  is going to expand its balance sheet and help it out, okay?  it might, but it might charge extra for this and so forth.  this is the hierarchy  of, of money showing up in the, in the payment system.  these balances here, these bank balances are called corresponding balances.  and they make the, the system work much more like  the ideal one big bank operating on a credit,  a credit system. the expansion or contraction.  depends on the arrangements between the banks.  the retail customer has no idea about this.  it's all behind the scenes.  from retail customer's point of view it's all the same.  
those are arcane little details. okay.  but when, but in dea, in these details, okay, is  the, is the understanding of how the monetary system works.  the discipline part. and the elasticity part.  okay.  there's this elasticity part during the day.  and then there's this, contraction discipiline part.  at the end of the day where you're supposed to come up  with real money, meaning reserves at the fed, and that's the survival constraint.  and if you don't, okay, the fed will help  you out, okay, but it's going to charge you.  and you're supposed to manage your business  so that you don't need to use this.  they will frown at you, they will, they will send bank examiners.  to ask you if you really know your  business and if you're a good banker or not.  you really don't want to do this.  so but how do you, so this, now this explains why there is an interbank market.  okay. because at the end of the day.  okay.  some, not all banks are going to be at zero.  if you think about this as a, as a closed system.  right.  you can see, not all banks are going to be at zero, but  some are going to have pluses and some are going to have minuses, and the  net is going to be at zero, if a, if everyone is a part  of this system you know, it, it, the net is going to be zero.  so if i owe the fed, there's somebody out there  who has excess reserves, and if i could  just find them and do business with them, okay?  similarly here.  okay?  i owe chips.  there's going to be somebody who is, who is owed money by chips.  if i have a deficits, there's somebody who has a surplus.  and all i need to do is find them and  do some little trade with them at the end of the  day and then we'll both be flat, zero, and neither  of us will have to, have to deal with the fed.  okay. so there  are these inter bank markets to allow these banks to find each other.  is the point.  the relevant inter bank market here is the euro dollar market.  [noise]  actually any one of these markets works  because they all settle ultimately at the fed.  so this is sort of stylized story i'm making for you.  but this is a world dollar market.  any bank can be a member of, of chips or  it can have a correspondent who's a member of chips.  not every bank can be a member of fedwire.  okay?  so that's a much tighter, much, much much more exclusive club.  okay?  over there, okay?  this is a, this is a non-exclusive club. there are lots of foreign  banks that are members of this, and they can  borrow and lend to each other in the eurodollar market.  the eurodollar market and, and, and these banks borrow  and lend to each other in the fed funds market.  [noise]  so you can think, sort of, of the fed  funds as being domestic dollars and public dollars, fed dollars.  okay?  and euro dollars as being international dollars, private dollars, and,  and, but they, they serve a similar, a similar function.  so the fed is worried about these credit expansion, and getting paid.  and, and, and so is, so is chips.  and so over time, they have tightened  up a little bit.  and they've said well, you can't run, you're, you're,  the size of your overdraft depends on your capital.  if you're a big bank, we'll let you run big overdrafts.  if you're a small bank, we, we won't let you.  also, we're going to charge for these overdrafts.  you can't use these as a free loan and we're going to charge you something.  it winds up they don't charge very much, because they charge  b, eh, a rate of interest based on your average overdraft during  the day.  so if you run a trillion dollar overdraft okay,  for 30 micro seconds okay, you know there is  no interest basically on that so the banks knows that but it does, it does serve as a  disciplining function because if your running it for 30  micro seconds that means you, you have an idea  where the money's coming from and you're just using  the fed to kind of clear all of this.  and so there's no, there's no interest.  then there can be, this mostly happens at the end of the  day in these overdrafts.  then there are large security transactions that are  happening and clearing internationally all of this happening.  and chips has to clear.  and then they clear it, they clear it through fred, fed wires.  very large, very, very large amounts of money are transacted  at the end of the day at, at the fed.  we need a fed funds market to, to create a bilateral overnight borrowing.  to substitute for this  centralized overnight lending that would, that the fed would be  forced to do otherwise and doesn't want to do, okay?  so that's what the fed, that's a way of understand, of understanding  what, what the fed funds market is there, is there to do.  bank a has an overdraft at the fed. at the end of the day  bank b has a surplus at the end of the day at bank b at,  at the fed.  so bank b and bank a could find each other and they could do business, okay.  and that business would look like this.  >> okay?  plus, i'm going to borrow in the fed funds market.  and bank b is going to lend in the fed funds market.  okay? and what are we borrowing and lending?  okay.  what, what actually is a fed fund in this regard?  okay.  what a fed fund is, is typically a, a promise to pay, to pay  reserves tomorrow, tomorrow morning. okay.  if you give me so many reserves now.  i will give you so many reserves tomorrow morning.  that's what a fed, fed fund's  loan is.  they're typically overnight, but you can range these things for terms.  you can have them automatically roll over, but, but think  of it as an overnight loan at this, at this moment.  so that means that this is a loan. and what, what bank a gets by, by  putting itself in the, by promising to pay reserves tomorrow it gets reserves today.  [sound]  okay?  and when bank b accepts this promise, okay, it has to deliver reserves today.  right now.  [sound]  okay?  so you can see where those reserves come from, okay?  you can see that these reserves now can be used to, to pay back that overdraft.  okay?  [sound]  [sound],  the balance sheet of  the fed expanded, the balance sheet of  the fed. contracted back.  more generally, if there weren't these over drafts to begin with.  so i don't want to the the important thing to appreciate is  that these banks are in the fed funds market all the time.  okay, not, they don't wait till the end of the day.  they anticipate their needs, and they borrow and  lend in the fed funds market all day long.  okay, there's a desk that's looking at that.  so they don't necessarily, they're not just necessarily  just coming in when they have an over draft.  they're trading.  okay.  so let's take this overdraft stuff out of here, okay.  and understand that this is the essence of a, of a fed funds transaction, right.  that bank b is giving up reserves today, in order to get a promise.  to receive fed funds tomorrow okay and bank a is promising tomorrow  in order to get reserves today so this is the fed funds thing.  you could use this simply to then a make the payment  one because bank a has, has reserves, you could now  use those to make a payment to a to a the.  to bank b.  so you could do this whole transaction before hand.  not worry about overdrafts.  do the fed funds transaction before hand and then make a payment.  and what does that show up as? that shows up as minus reserves.  that's the payment okay, and the fed funds  borrowing, shows up as the, as the reverse okay.  the point i'm trying to make here is that if want to make a  payment to b, to bank b, bank a is to make payment to bank b.  and it doesn't have any reserves.  it can go into the fed funds market first.  and it can borrow reserves from b. okay, and then pay those reserves to b.  okay, so all of this, all cancels out, okay, and  what you're doing is essentially pushing that payment off until  tomorrow is essentially what that is, is doing.  i'm going to pay you today, i'm going to  pay you today by promising to pay you tomorrow.  that's what's going on here, i'm paying you today by promising to pay you.  tomorrow.  
sort of like, what's happening in the repo market is in, is in  some sense sort of like what was happening in the fed funds market, right?  remember i showed you last time, i argued, it  was, it was about an inter bank market, right?  and about how deficit banks and surplus banks could meet  at the end of the day and, and, and trade.  the surplus bank could lend to the deficit  bank so that this, this is like this, okay?  that this bank which is now borrowing overnight.  so this is like, this is  like the surplus agent. this one's lending overnight.  this is, this is the, this is the this one's borrowed.  did i, did i say?  so they're borrowing, so they're the deficit agent.  and this is the surplus agent. they're lending overnight.  and this is the dealer who's standing in the middle, so this is  like that hsbc that i said was acting as a fed funds dealer.  in fact, in the fed funds market, there's  not much dealing, it's almost all just brokering.  okay, there's not an actual dealer, but in the in the repo market, it's all dealing.  okay, pretty much, it's, it's mostly on the balance sheet of security dealers  that are on one or the other side of these, of these accounts.  one or, one or the other side of this market.  so, what i'm trying to, this, this image here should  have in, should, should give you the impression, which is correct.  okay?  that the repo market is like the fed funds  market in the sense that it allows deficit agents and  surplus agents to meet and to clear the, and  to push their liabilities and assets off into another day.  that's true. but here, it's almost any agent, right?  if you have a treasury bond,  you can do repo, okay?  it's not, you don't, you don't have to be a bank, you don't have to be  a member of the federal reserve system, you  don't have to do anything of those things, okay?  so, the repo market is for everybody.  okay?  and, and, and, and but banks of course can operate in it as well so it's, it's much  more democratic, okay, much more open than, than than the fed, feds fund market.  why is it that the repo market is  a dealer market whereas the feds funds market is a, is a is a broker market?  what did i do with my chalk?  here it is.  one of the reasons is because people know the security dealer, okay?  there's a very, these are, these are prime dealers, these are big banks, okay?  and so having them on the other side of your transaction.  means that you don't have to worry about who, who,  who's over there, you just worry about him.  you just, you see, you see that name.  in a way the dealers are making a, a  heterogeneous object, you can imagine, you can repo anything.  you know you can repo a corporate bond, you can re, repo  a mor, mortgage bank security, you can repo all kinds of stuff, okay.  so it's pretty, and you can be anyone.  you know, as i said, anyone can be, can be in the repo market.  so it's a pretty heterogeneous market, but the dealers  are on the other side of all that and that's what makes it homogeneous.  okay, naturally the dealer is borrowing at a lower  rate than is lending, okay and he's taking that and  he's taking that spread and, and doing, this is just  business, and making making a market here as, as well.  that is to say many different kinds of agents okay,  who are wanting to use repo as a source of  funds borrowing.  many different kinds of agents who are wanting to use  repo, as a use of funds as something they invest  in the kinds of securities that are available to back  this are many different kinds in the fixed income market.  you know every corporation has it's own security, it has  several different classes of security, there, it's not like treasury  bonds, treasury bonds is kind of a treasury bond you  know and, and yeah they have different maturity's and so forth.  but it's the government, it's pretty standardized it's pretty homogeneous.  this is, the, the what makes the repo  market homogeneous, is the name of the dealer, okay?  is the dealer who is, who's sort of dictating terms, and making  the market, and, and making it, making it homogeneous in this way.  there's even, they even have general collateral reto, repo now, so that the  dealer is, has permission to replace  this collateral with another kind of collateral.  so that you don't have to re, you don't have to give back the same  kind of collateral that you, that you got, in order to keep it smoother and.  so, there, there, it's the, it's the dealer as the central  figure, in a, in a way the dealer, it's, it's a liability.  of the of the dealer on both sides.  the liability to return securities and the liability to return money.  yes?  >> if someone defaults on a repo  does anything happen other than losing the collateral  [inaudible]?  >> well, you're still like any loan, you are still supposed to.  you, you're liable for it, and typically, now i'm going to show you.  typically you want to repay because the collateral  is usally more than the value of the loan.  so we going to, this, this comes to that.  usually people default on repo.  because they, they don't have the security.  there was somebody, somebody bought it from them and  didn't return it. it's not because they've gone insolvent.  [blank_audio]  
okay.  the eurodollar market is not just a  parallel system, it's the world's funding market.  the world funding market is the dollar market.  what i mean by that is, is, is this. that we  have a, anywhere in the world people who want  to borrow, people who want to borrow and people  who want to lend, the ultimate borrowers  and ultimate lenders. want to do it in dollars, and  they don't, this isn't just about payments.  this is about for periods of time.  and the eurodollar system is  intermediating that flow.  [sound]  let me just give you a little example.  so, here we could have an overnight, your dollar deposit.  [sound].  so, here is a lender but its a lender who, who is lending  overnight but its money balance basically, here,  that, that he wants to hold some of his wealth  in the form of money at some euro, some euro bank.  and then there's a term loan, here.  so this is to some term, say six months or something like that.  [cough]  you can see the sense in which, the euro dollar system is intermediating.  it's taking the deposits of the lender and using them  to fund a loan to a borrower, anywhere in the world.  so this might be a korean manufacturer, this might be a petrodollar deposit.  for example, okay?  and it's all happening through a bank that is off shore of, of the united states.  now this sort of diagram should look familiar to you from last  time, remember? when i was talking about the repo dealer.  the repo dealer, which was, which had short-term repo, overnight repo.  as a kind of deposit on its liability side, and it had term repo as an asset.  okay? and i said it was acting as a bank.  well, here's a bank that's acting as a bank, or acting  as a repo dealer.  the bank, the euro-dollar system, is essentially a system of money dealing.  this is, this is a dealer.  the euro, the euro dollar system is a di, a  dealer system, where the banks are quoting, buying at sell prices.  they are saying, i will, if you want to deposit with me, here is the interest rate  i'll give you, if you want a loan from me, here is what i'll charge you, okay.  that's a bid  aspect, okay, right there.  so banks are dealers, banks are dealers in  money, and that's what we're talking about here.  so these are money dealers.  your dollars unlike repo are unsecured.  okay, there's not some treasury bill  somewhere that's acting as collateral here.  what the security is for, for this is the whole balance sheet of the bank, okay?  the capital of the bank, their backstop, whatever with  a national government or whatever, it's all of that.  this is unsecured lending.  unsecured lending, just like fed funds,  in that, in that regard.  but fed funds, okay, is a, is a broker market, typically.  it's just banks borrowing and lending to each  other, and, and brokers will put them together.  it's not showing up on the dealer's balance sheet.  the eurodollar market is a funding market and so it  does show up on the balance sheet of the eurodollar banks.  this is the thing  that is grown to be completely, completely huge  because it's the world, it's the world funding market.  no matter who you are if you want to borrow very large amounts of  money and you some small country some  where or even some large country somewhere.  most likely you ultimately funding that loan  in the world dollar, world dollar market.  partly that's because there's a lot of people who want to have deposits or  maybe term deposits too, you know, they want to hold dollars.  there are people who want to hold dollar  and there are people who want to borrow dollars.  if you borrow dollars and you are korea your facing foreign exchange risk and  we can were going to deal with that when we get to the foreign exchange.  and similarly if you are are chile and are holding a  dollar deposit you know there is a foreign exchange issue there.  but nonetheless, a tremendous amount of, of  the world financial activity happens in dollars.  and, and, and it happens in the eurodollar system here, outside the united states.  and therefore, not subject to any of the fed's regulation and oversight.  and anything like that.  the, the rule in bank regulation.  is that it is the home country, that is to say where this bank resides, okay, that,  that is the one that, that supervises it, even though it's dealing in dollars.  right, so it might be in france, dealing in dollars.  it, it is supervised by the french national  central bank and to some extent the ecp.  okay it might be anywhere, okay.  and it can deal in dollars on both sides.  it can expand its balance sheets, it can create essentially what is money.  it's not counted in the domestic money  supply of the united states, this, i's off-shore.  it's not the liabil, it's not the liability of an onshore bank and  it's not the asset of any consumer or business in the united states.  it's not counted in the us money supply.  okay, but you can see, from exxon's point of view, you know, a deposit  in in europe, is more or less the same thing as a deposit in, in new york,  okay.  you can move them back and forth, they trade at par, they're the same thing.  they're the same thing. they trade at par.  this shows you stress on that  trading at par. they almost didn't trade at par.  in order to keep trading at par, eurodollars  had to pay a full percentage point more.  in order to keep people from breaking the buck.  so, i'm showing the euro dollar's system at sort  of inaggregate here that hold all of the banks together.  that the, that the lenders are putting the money  in and the borrowers are taking the money out.  okay?  is the, is the story. okay?  but of course it's not like that, it's individual  banks and and individual banks don' t necessarily have  matched book how do they, how do they get matched book?  they want matched book for a couple of  reasons, and that's what we're going to start building here.  so let me erase this and talk about two different banks.  two different  banks. in fact  i, i in the, in the  notes, i continued to call  one of them citi london and one  of them credit lyomaise.  and suppose that there are credit lyonaise has a lot of customers  who want to, want dollar deposits. okay.  so, from its point of view, the problem is that more  people want dollar liabilities than it can find use for those funds.  okay. so it has excess dollar deposits.  [sound]  and citi london is in the opposite position.  okay.  it's because of citibank's network, whatever.  it's got lots of people it can lend out a, any amount of money.  okay.  but it doesn't have a very developed deposit base, okay, in, in, in europe.  so it's got excess dollar loans.  yeah.  so, see what i'm doing, i'm taking this euro system there and  i'm pulling it apart okay?  and saying so the borrower is here and the ultimate lender is over here and i'm  pulling the system into two pieces i'm talking about two different things.  okay? so this is from the point of view of  dollar exposure this one has lots of dollars to lend so it's a sort of surplus.  this one needs dollars, this one's deficit in the dollar department.  and so they can do business by borrowing and lending to each other all  right. so you  can see that these  deposits are funding  these loans. but there is this interbank  loan here, okay, that moves the money from one bank to another.  a very large, when people talk about the eurodollar, this  [inaudible]  it's the london interbank offer rate.  so that's the rate that we're talking about.  it's the rate that banks borrow and lend to each other.  and it always, i mean i know that it's a, people say, what the,  why are these bank doing all this  borrowing and lending to each other, you know?  this is just ridiculous finance stuff, you know.  they should be lending to, real productive activity or something  like that.  well this is why, okay, there there moving the money  from places where where it is to places where it's needed.  and the way that happens is through through  kind of a inter bank inter bank loan here.  okay? this is the euro dollar market.  the, the market where where european  banks, offshore banks that need funding for  loans borrow that funding from banks that have excess funding.  okay?  and they borrow and lend to each other.  this is the market that sort of broken down or  breaking down in europe right now because these are unsecured loans.  and if you don't think your going to get paid back, okay, then  why should you make this loan, so, this is, this is a problem.  and if you, if you don't know what your going to  be able to if you don't know, if you don't want to make  this loan you may not want to take this deposit and anyway.  so the whole thing starts to break down, if you can't, if you can't do that.  [blank_audio]  
we have all the pieces of the puzzle. let's put them together for something.  let's focus on this bank.  okay abstract from that for a moment and look at this bank.  step two bills are coming in and notes are going out.  step four.  notes are coming in and bills are going out.  okay?  that's it. that's the banking business.  okay? cash in flow.  cash out flow. cash out flow.  cash in flow.  this is not the only such thing this bank is doing.  this bank has many customers, many bills maturing at different times.  you know,  [unknown],  somebody may come in today, want a 90 day, and tomorrow that becomes  an 89 day bill, and the day after it's an 88 day bill.  so, there's a ladder of bills of different maturities,  that the, that the bank has on its balance sheet.  so, and all of those are promises to pay at particular dates.  so the bank knows that, it knows when  it's going to receive cash presuming that they pay, right?  it has the time sequencing of its inflows. it knows.  it just looks in its note drawer it looks in its  bill drawer and it sees exactly when it's expecting to get paid.  on the liability side, it has deposit accounts, demand deposits.  and they, which, which are, which could possibly  all go away tomorrow, but it knows its  customer payments and it, it gets used to those and so it knows how many notes  it needs to hold.  so the banker's business is matching these inflows and outflows mainly in, in here.  making sure that, you know, ideally, in any given day, you're getting repaid  by somebody at the, and you use those very same notes to pay somebody else.  you know, so you're, the cash is coming in, and then you redeploy it.  you don't want to be holding too much cash, because it doesn't pay interest.  the cash comes in, and then you redeploy it.  by discounting another bill.  if it doesn't line up exactly,  maybe you can do something like this. you know, that doesn't require notes.  okay.  and meanwhile, you can always do acceptances.  okay.  but the mo-, main thing you can do is to try to influence these flows.  influence peoples coming to you with bills, say and try  to tell them, you know what i'm running scarce of notes,  don't discount with me.  go down to another bank at this moment, okay.  just avoid this business and how do you do that?  you give people a bad price if you don't want to discount that bill.  because you don't have the notes or you're worried about the liquidity risk,  you just say oh, i'll do that business because you're such a good  customer but at the moment i would have to charge such and such  a price, i think you can get a better deal down the street.  so you seem like you're doing a favor to this  customer but in fact it's your own book you're worried about.  okay.  it's your own notes.  and what does it mean giving somebody a bad price?  what is means is, changing the rate you're quoted.  okay. interest rate.  alright? i always use r's for interest rates.  so the discount rate is a rate.  as i said, it's like 5%, or something, and if you raise the discount rate,  the rate your quote, that's like lowering the price that you'll buy the bill for.  right? so, if you raise that rate, that  discourages discount.  it tells people, i'm not offering a competitive rate, go somewhere else.  okay?  go to another bank.  it discourages discount, and, as a consequence, if this part of  the, if step two isn't happening, only step four is happening.  bills are maturing, and if bills are maturing, notes are coming back in.  i'm not sending notes out, i'm only having notes, and so later on, i can, i can  lower my discount rate again, when i'm ready to discount.  when i have some notes and i'm not facing this, this stringency.  [sound]  and i  could  lower it, and i could lower it back down again.  increasing discourages discount, and therefore, i'm shifting my  balance sheet out of bills and into cash.  r goes down, encourages discount.  i'm shifting my balance sheet out of cash and into bills.  okay? this is the discount mechanism.  that banks use in order to manage their cash flow.  i'm, i'm emphasizing that this is about managing your cash flow.  all other banks are doing this too.  you know, there is, this is a competitive industry and so  people are quoting prices and at any point there is a little  dispersion of prices and the customers are watching this and choosing  where, where the best, where the best price is and going there.  for discount.  is doing business with other banks.  i mentioned that second, because you already know about this stuff,  you know, from the fed funds market and so forth, right?  that if i'm running, if i'm running out of cash, okay, all that ...  what i could do is borrow from another, from another bank.  okay.  just, just acquire additional reserves from another bank.  okay.  and i have lots of assets here, all  these bills of exchange, so i could just rediscount  them at another bank. okay.  so this is one mechanism.  changing the discount rate is one mechanism.  for influencing cash flow. another is rediscount  at another bank.  okay?  instead of the customer going to the other bank and discounting, i  go to the other bank you know, with an asset i already have.  and, and say, you know, do me a favor.  i need to borrow, i need to borrow some  notes from you, and i'll give you a good price.  so there's this inter-bank market.  okay, this is essentially an interbank money market that's going,  going on here, in the re-discounting, in the re-discounting business.  and so the banks at any moment there's a couple of  prices, there's a price at which you're willing to discount to customers.  there's also a price at which you're  willing to re-discount with another bank, so  these are buy, sell spread, this is a buy, sell spread that's going on here.  these banks, these banks are money dealers.  okay, and the d, and the prices at which they're dealing  are, are,the, the are the discount rate and the re-discount rate.  so they're they're it's a buy sell spread that's going on here.  and this is in bagehot's time, and this is,  you know this is how the world, the world worked.  
look at real dealers.  they have a more sophisticated trading strategy than this okay.  instead of being exposed to the movement of the  price and securities, they are more hedged than that.  they will have long positions in some  securities and short positions in other securities.  that move, that are correlated, or move, or move in the same direction.  what a real dealer looks like as we know, if you remember back when  we were looking at the repo market, a real dealer looks like this.  there are securities out here in the world, holders of securities okay.  which the dealer is, is acquiring with a reverse repo.  meaning, they are lending money to the owners  of securities, and taking in the securities as collateral.  okay.  they may then sell those securities in order  to establish a short position in those securities.  on the other side, repo, there's securities out,  and cash it, okay?  so the dealer is borrowing cash and  providing securities as collateral for that borrowing.  okay, so these securities are coming in on the reverse side,  they're going out on the, on, on, on the repo side.  there's inventories of cash on this side,  there's inventories of securities on this side.  and the dealer  is on both sides of that market.  so they're, they don't necessarily have match book.  you know, they, they may, they, they're going to have some  net exposure, but they have a lot of gross exposure.  a lot bigger gross exposure than their net exposure.  not let me, let me just, how can i explain that.  so there's gross exposure.  by that, i mean just the size of the balance sheet.  okay.  and net exposure refers to the net of longs minus shorts.  long positions minus shorts. okay?  and it's possible that you could have a very large balance sheet.  but if you're an, have a matched book, you have no net exposure.  net exposure might be  zero, okay?.  or you could have a very small balance sheet and the, net  exposure could be very large because it's all, it's all on one side.  and you have no, you have you no hedging on the other, on the other side.  so, these two things don't necessarily go together.  what we have seen in the dealers, when i,  the dealers right now, their balance sheets are very strange.  because they're being pushed around by the fed, doing its quantitative  [unknown]  three, and all that sort of thing.  but typically, the dealers have a net exposure that  is an exposure to the term spread, if you remember.  meaning, they're long, long term bonds and short, short term bonds.  okay, so they're picking up the, the failure of expectations hypothesis  of the term structure as a source of profit for them.  they are, they're borrowing short and lending long, just like a bank.  borrowing short and lending long.  and they're picking up, so they're exposing themselves  to price risk because they have net exposure.  but they know that in general exposure  to that price risk is a profitable thing to do.  because of the failure of the expectations hypothesis of the term structure.  so that's a business to expose yourself to the term spread.  and you could expose yourself to other spreads too.  that's the dealer business, is building up your gross exposure.  okay, and then controlling your net exposure so that  you, you, you have strong, you have strong controls.  the trainer model  is all about net exposure here.  gross exposure is liquidity risk though, though  because your, you have to fund these positions.  and if they, they if the person who's on your counter party risk.  if they don't pay you, then you can't pay the people you promised to  pay and so they're, well get to that later on when we get to banking.  right now in the trainer model, i just want to say it's all about price risk.  it's all about price risk and that the that the dealer, the dealer's  willingness to make markets. to provide market liquidity has to  do with, with their exposure to price risk and their ability to manage price risk.  if they can manage price risk very well.  they're trying to manage it very well, because that lets them  make tighter spreads, and that makes them beat out the other dealers.  so, that's the competition.  the competition is to,  to be good at this business so that you don't have to use a lot of  capital and you can, you can leverage up  and, and make these are tiny little spreads.  they're tiny little spreads but you can make money  in this, in this dealer, in this dealer business.  so how do you make money as a dealer? you make money as a dealer by  having very good access to inventories of securities.  and very good access to inventories of cash.  you know where the securities are.  you know, you know where what, what  long only pension funds are holding various securities.  so that if you need to acquire them,  you can find them.  you're not holding the inventories, gross inventories on your own balance sheet.  because then you'd have to finance them and you don't want to do that.  okay, you're letting them hold them on their own balance and when you need them.  so when a client comes and they and they want that security you know where  to go and get it so you can get it and sell it to them.  okay?  there's inventories of the securities out in the world.  and there's inventories of cash out in the world.  so you have a good relationship  with your banker.  maybe you're in fact a subsidiary of a banker so you  have a particularly good relationship with the banker because they're you.  and it's a different part of the balance sheet of  the bank and you're just moving that cash back and forth.  and that's where the inventories of cash are.  the inventories are not on your balance sheet,  for the most part, they're out in the world.  just like west side market right?  the mangoes are not,  you know, they're, they're out in front, but  the actual inventories of mangoes are in jersey somewhere.  you know, the, the large ones, if you had to absorb a large order.  okay?  they know where they could get some mangoes.  and so it's the, it's the same with, with security dealers.  so dealers make money, first of all, by having knowledge about  this, they make money also by paying attention to their net position.  okay, and moving prices when, so that they don't  get bagged by people who know more than them.  and they change that bit as spread if  the volatility increases, they, they move that around.  so.  they, they pay close attention to that, and and change it minute by minute  if need be, in order to in order to make money.  and by offsetting their long long risk exposures  with short risk exposures so that they're net flat or near or nearly flat.  because every time you're buying right,  every time you're buying, you're buying here.  every time you're selling, you're selling here.  so, if you're bulk buying and selling you're making this spread.  and so the more you can do that okay, the more money  you make. that's  the idea.  
remember now, go back to here.  i said, what makes, how do you make money at this business?  it's the spread between the overnight rate and the term rate.  and that the, and i said, let's just  bracket the question of the overnight rate right now.  okay.  and let's treat this as unproblematic, the fed just fixes it.  and let's worry about the turn rate.  and that made progress.  see, this is how you do theory.  you've got to bracket something in order to see clearly.  but now we, have to unbracket it. okay.  and say, okay.  so now, can we use this same structure to understand the overnight market?  we need to now think about the overnight market.  you know, where does that price come from?  it is true what i said that the fed is fussing with the fed funds rate.  okay?  so, they have to be in the picture now.  okay? we can't just have a little  story about you know, unnamed dealers of dealers of last resort bid, bid you know?  what we had before about warren buffet being the deep  pockets, and that sort of thing, the outside spread story.  okay.  what i want to suggest to you is the one  thing the fed does, is to create an outside spread.  okay? for the fed funds market.  ok, that's very clear, and i'll show you in a minute.  another thing the fed does in normal times,  is that it actually tries to stabilize the fed funds rate.  okay.  and how does it do that.  so we need to think about both of those things.  okay.  so here's the fed funds market.  from the point of view of a, of a  bank that might be dealing in the fed funds market.  and certainly we know two things about the current market.  okay, so this  is the fed funds rate now.  not a term rate but an overnight, overnight fed funds rate.  one thing we know, is that the fed is now paying interest on excess reserves.  didn't used to do that.  it used to, if you wanted to have reserves with  the fed, you, you get the same interest that cash has.  okay? which is zero.  okay? but, now, it's paying.  25 %. 0.25 interest on excess reserves.  ioer. they actually abbreviate it like that.  interest on excess reserves, 0.25. okay?  i'm putting that down here, you know, anticipating an upward sloping line.  okay?  because obviously, if the fed is willing to pay  0.25 that's going to put a floor on the yield.  so now, those of you who've been reading your ft say, but professor merling,  the effective feds fund rate was, was 16 basis  points which is below 25, how can that be?  okay?  well, it must be that the people who are paying, who are  getting 16 basis points cannot deposit at the fed and get 25.  so they're, they're, and they're depositing with somebody  who can deposit with the fed and get 25.  so some bank is picking up that spread.  they're taking in fed funds at sixteen, and  they're putting em' in the fed at twenty-five.  okay. so.  we can.  so. don't worry about that.  i think it's still, i would still characterize that, as the fed  is putting a floor on the fed funds rate at point two-five.  everything else is just sort of an exception.  that's one thing and if you look on the  fed's website, they also now are putting a ceiling.  because they say the discount rate at which they are willing  to lend to banks, okay, is 0.75. okay.  if they're willing to lend to banks at 0.75, then  the fed funds rate can't really ever go over 0.75.  so, that's another, so, that's an outside spread.  the fed is making the outside spread, in the fed funds market,  pretty clearly, here.  dealer spread of something, and the fed, and the fed funds market.  upper sloping curve because we're talking about yields not prices.  okay?  and what do we observe in the market today?  we observe, okay, that there are a lot of banks who have a trillion  dollars worth of excess reserves at the fed, paying 0.25 %.  so we're way, so we're here. we're here.  this is where we are.  okay. we're, we're smack here.  maybe this isn't even a constraint you know, this just goes way out.  there's a trillion dollars there. okay.  so the, the the fed funds rate is not somewhere in the  middle here, you know, as you would expect with the outside spread.  we're smack up against the outside spread.  we're smack up against the, the fed's is  flooding the market you know with liquidity, and  it's establishing this number here. point 25.  but that's unusual, that's pathological  maybe even, that's not how it hopes to.  proceed in the future.  it doesn't want there to be a trillion dollars' worth of excess reserves.  and in fact, they're trying, i'm going to show you in a  minute, they're trying some things to try to soak up some  of those excess reserves.  you may remember, when we were doing repo, i showed you, they were  trying reverse repo as as way of soaking up some of these excess reserves.  they're also, just last month, they tried term deposits.  okay?  i'm going to show you this in a minute, but let's just imagine that they,  w-, how did thinks work before the crisis, how did this lecture go before the crisis.  okay?  the way this lecture went before the  crisis, was the fed makes an outside spread  but then they try to stabilize, they have a target fed funds rate.  which is inside there, and they intervene daily,  really, in order to stabilize the fed funds rate.  okay? so that's like this.  okay at that point interest on excess reserves was zero.  okay? and the fed  funds target was like here. fed funds or put it a little higher maybe.  fed funds target.  [sound]  okay? and this is the discount rate here.  [sound]  and before the crisis the fed made a spread, typically they would  even say, the discount rate is 100 basis points over the fed  funds target. which is a full percentage point.  and the return on deposits was zero because  it's like cash so it was typically well below.  you know, if the fed funds? was 4% you're talking  400 basis points down to, down to the outside spread there.  the outside spread was there but it never really never really bit.  okay? because the fed was stabilizing.  okay? around the fed funds target.  they were trying to anticipate fluctuating demand in the fed funds market.  and, and supply that demand on a daily basis.  if you look back at, at open market operations.  reports before the crisis.  they're in the market everyday.  they're trying in fact, the people wrote all books about this.  i read these books, you know.  how do, how do you forecast the need for  reserves, and so the fed made this into an art.  okay?  and they would do repo sometimes twice a day.  okay?  in order to supply reserves to the market  to, to, to, to stabilize to stabilize prices.  how does that, should i, i showed you how that worked in the, in the lecture  when i introduced this maybe i should show you again, so that you remember.  since we now realize we have all this spare board capacity.  so what are we, what are we talking about  when i talk about the fed intervening in markets.  in order to stabilize the fed funds rate we're talking about balance sheets.  so, we have a bank  we have a dealer,  and we have the fed.  and when the fed wanted to add reserves okay?  it, why would it want to add reserves, because the market by itself is pushing  the fed funds rate above the target, and  so they're trying to stabilize for whatever reason.  for policy, whatever.  they're trying to stabilize that, and so they add reserves, and the  way they do that is by lending to the market through treasury repo.  okay, this is called temporary  open market operations.  temporary because of this repo right, so it's, it's what's repo?  repo is the simultaneous purchase sale of a security,  that's how it's constructed, for a particular period of time.  it might be overnight, it might be 3 days, it might be a week, but it's temporary.  it's not like buying treasury bills.  if you buy treasury bills outright, that's  a permanent, you know, open market operation.  this is a temporary one, okay?  you're sort of buying a treasury  bill, but promising to sell it back. okay?  so it's temporary.  that's how a repo works.  and you're, you're buying it from the from the dealer.  okay?  the dealer can't hold an account at the fed, but the dealer's bank can.  okay? and, i'm going to show this as,  that the dealer repays a loan from the bank.  i think when i showed it before, i  treated it as the dealer accumulating deposits, over here.  just put that in brackets. that's, that's an alternative.  okay?  we don't know what the dealer's position is.  the dealer, the dealer's borrowing from the bank, which typically they are.  okay?  and they got some extra cash, they would use it to reduce their borrowing.  because they borrow, they borrow from the, from the dealer at fed funds plus 50.  okay.  and as long as the repo rate.  as long as the reaper rate is bellow  around plus 50 rather borrow at the reaper rate.  so that's  they're going to do, they're going to  replace expansive borrowing with cheap borrowing.  so what this does, is to increase the reserve of the banking system which they  then can lend out into the fed-funds market,  and put down or presser on the price.  this is how the fed.  and normal times, was trying to hit this,  hit this target that i was showing you here.  but the effect of all of that though okay, is, is to a you know,  your, your, your, your trading to try to push around the dealers position.  >> you know. whenever you're, whenever you're trading.  whenever the fed is, is, is moving into the market.  okay?  you're trading with the dealers.  and so, you're moving around their inventories.  okay?  and so, you're moving around their prices.  so, this is what you're doing.  you're, the, the fed was stabilizing the fed fends rate.  and it's doing so by taking, by acting.  see what it's doing, you know, it's expanding  both sides of it's balance sheets so it's, the  fed funds market is 1 bank lending to another,  now the fed says, i'll do that myself, actually.  okay?  this is a bank lending to the fed, this  is the fed lending to, lending to a dealer here.  so it's moving some of the fed funds market onto it's own balance sheet.  in,  and in so doing it's sort of acting as, as a dealer of first resort.  you know, it's not making the outside spread.  it's trading in the market itself.  okay? there, it's no the outside spread.  it's trading at the inside spread.  it's probably trading inside the inside spread,  because it asks the dealers to bid.  okay?  and, it takes the best bids.  so the dealers are, it, it's, it's getting a better price than a corporation  would get if it was, if it was trading in repo.  
[noise]  what about, crisis? let us start  by talking about what i will call a normal crisis, the  kind of market imbalance that might conceivably happen  every day, and. let me just give you a concrete example.  [sound].  we have households here.  [sound].  could be businesses, but it's not bank. that's the point.  we have households who decide, for some reason or other.  okay?  that they don't want to hold the securities they're holding.  they want to hold money instead.  okay?  so they've shifted their risk preferences.  they've shifted their liquidity preferences.  something. okay?  maybe they've only shifted it for one  day, and tomorrow they're going to shift it back.  okay?  but meanwhile, what happens?  okay? that's why i call it a normal crisis.  if they just switched for one day, and they switched back, the  point is the dealer system is there to absorb imbalances in order flow.  right?  and so, in a normal crisis, the dealer system absorbs this imbalance.  let's just see how this works.  the household says, i don't want to hold these securities anymore.  i want to hold, the bank deposits.  households think of bank deposits as money.  well, when you sell securities, so this is the net position  of the household sector, if the household sector is selling securities.  okay? the dealer system is buying securities.  they're on the other side cause i'm, i'm saying there's an  order imbalance that the household sector is on net selling securities.  so where do those securities go? who buys them?  well the dealer is a quoting a bid-ask spread and so the dealer buys them.  [sound]  okay? and the dealer finances those  by, let's say, using those securities as as collateral  and issuing a repurchase agreement which is bought by a bank.  [noise]  by expanding its balance sheet.  okay? so all these things add up.  right?  you can see where the households are selling  securities and, and, and, and getting, and getting money.  that money comes from here.  okay?  securities are financed by the dealer borrowing from the bank.  so everything all adds up.  okay?  and it's sort of it's sort of magical, that the the dealers  are giving the households the impression that they've sold their securities.  okay?  but in fact they haven't really, not, not to a final  user, you know they've just been absorbed by the banking system.  these deposits are new deposits. right?  they didn't really exist before. but the houses don't know that.  they look exactly like old deposits.  you can't, you can't tell any difference. so they  think that this is, they, they have no reason to  think that these securities weren't just absorbed by some other households.  you know, there's no way, unless you know the balance sheet of the banking system,  and the dealer system, you don't know that this was in fact an order flow imbalance.  okay?  that was absorbed by the dealer and banking system.  okay? you see how that all works?  so its a normal crisis absorb, now why are the dealers doing this?  okay?  and why are the banks doing this, there not doing this you know to  do you a favor i want to emphasize this again there doing this to make money.  okay? how are they making money?  they're making money in the following way because.  this, they will, and this is a consequence of  the dealer model that we were just showing here.  this dealer, in order to aquire these additional securities, is  going to, lower the price at which he aquires them.  okay?  so he's going to say, i'm happy to take these off your hands, but i'm  quite aware that there isn't a matching order on the other side of this market.  i know because i'm looking at my order book here.  okay?  and i'm going to be taking these securities onto my  balance sheet, and so, the price is going to be, lower.  okay?  in for, in order for me to make money on this.  so what we're seeing, if we just think about the price, asset prices here.  okay? and time here.  okay?  asset prices were here, and then there is this shift.  okay?  this sort of shock to the system.  and prices drop. prices drop here.  and then, hopefully they come back and the dealer,  when, when, when the, the flow's reversed, the dealer  makes a profit, because he's buying here and selling here.  okay? similarly if we think about the bank.  okay? the bank is lending interest lists here.  okay? and there is  [unknown]  sort of stability there and at the shock. okay?  there's more lending.  okay?  and so more liquidity risk, and so the bank says i'll do that.  okay?  if i get to lend to you at a little higher rate.  and then my plan is to when i liquidate my positions, its going to  be, its going to be the lower rate, so i'm going to make money on that.  so both banks and dealers have to be paid. they're both  profit, profit-maximizing institutions.  and, the way they get paid, is by shifting their  quotes around, depending on how much risk they're, they're being  asked to absorb, by the households that are saying; please  take this off my hands i don't want to right now.  okay?  they say we're happy to take this off your  ha, off your hands, you don't want to right now,  but you're just going to have to pay us a little bit and you don't see that payment.  right?  you see what you  sold the asset for, but that payment is embedded in the price.  okay?  the way you, the way you pay for that  is by getting a little bit less for this bond.  okay?  than you would if you were selling at a time when there were people on  the other side of the trade, actual genuine  people on the other side of the trade.  so that the dealer, themselves, didn't have to be on the other side of the trade.  okay?  so the dealer is making sure that he gets paid.  and banks, as dealers, are making  sure they get paid as, as, as well.  these are distortions, you know these are price distortions, may be  small, price distortions, but they're  distortions away from the fundamental value.  but they're possibly equilibrating distortions in the sense that by  moving these prices away, you're attracting other, other bids in.  you know, that, that if, if the price of these  assets are low, it could be somebody else notices that and  comes in, and, and buys these securities, and so you only had  to hold them for a little while and then you sold them  at a higher price and, and then this whole position get liquidated.  so, they're, they're these are distorted  prices but they're causing action, they're putting  pressure on the system by, by, by creating incentives to do something different.  okay? for the ultimate, the ultimate  buyers and sellers.  and i think, this is a sort of picture of what maybe happens  in, in, in normal daily fluctuations of order flow that happen, who knows why.  fluctuations in, in, in, i don't know, risk preference.  but, also, it just could be, i suddenly had  to make a large payment and i realized i  didn't have enough money in my, in my checking  account and so, i had to sell some securities.  now the person who's  buying those securities doesn't realize that i'm  motivated by liquidity concerns there still agreed  and know something about that securities so the price moves, the price moved up.  even though i'm i'm not motivated by any information whatsoever.  okay?  so and then and then and then it and then it and then it comes back.  once the market realizes that i'm not motive, motivated by any  information at, at all, but it takes, it takes a while.  
so now let's try to consolidate some of this.  i started with this hierarchy of financial instruments,  and i added these balance sheets over there.  which i've now erased okay, showing the hierarchy  of, of, of of entities, of financial institutions.  so let me just add those in here.  remember i was showing the central bank as having  gold as its asset and currency as its liability.  so we'll put the central bank here in straddling the layers of  the hierarchy and we'll put the banking  system here straddling the layers of the hierarchy.  and we'll put the private sector here.  and, in fact, i'm going to emphasize a particular entity in the private sector.  i'm going to enter, emphasize security dealers, here.  security dealers, here.  because i want to emphasize that each of these  institutions, in its own way, is a market maker, a  market maker in the following sense.  if you think of what a security dealer is, i  mean this is manhattan, so probably most people have some  notion of what a security dealer is, that if you  want to buy some apple stock they'll sell it to you.  if you want to sell some apple stock they'll buy it from you, okay.  there's, there's a bid-ask spread they're making markets.  the reason there are liquid markets in apple stock is  because there are dealers who are offering quotes like that, okay.  that in doing so, i'm,  i, we emphasize they're knitting together deposits and securities.  they're willing to go either way.  you know, if you want securities, they'll sell you securities.  if you want, if you want money, they'll, they'll buy your securities.  so they'll, they'll go either way.  okay?  they're, they're straddling in that, in our sense,  the layer, the bottom layer of the hierarchy.  kay, they're they're willing to go either way, depending on you.  and that is what determines prices.  kay?  the price of securities, or, what i emphasized, yet last time,  in the, when i talked about the four prices of money.  the price of securities, i'll let the interest rate stand in for that.  a very important theme of this course,  and we're going to, we're going to have a theory  of security dealers and there's going to be  charts and graphs and analytics and stuff, okay?  but the important thing to just alert you to right now.  is that we are going to think of banks as security dealers also, okay?  but the dealer, what they're offering is a bid outspread in money.  if you, if you want a bank deposit,  you have cash, you want a bank deposit, citibank will take it.  they'll give you a deposit for.  and if you want to go the other way, they'll do that too.  right? so there's a bid outspread for money.  that makes, that makes citibank work, okay?  as a, as a retail, as a retail bank.  the price that they're trying to maintain there is  this price i talked to you last time, is par.  that is to say, currency and deposits exchange one for one, okay?  and that's,  now that you understand that is a price.  you can see, well, it was a bit of  a challenge in keeping, keeping a price fixed like that.  and then finally we're going to understand the central  bank also as a kind of security dealer.  at yet a higher level, okay?  it is making markets between the international money and  the domestic money, and its willing to go either way.  okay, if you want international money, because you're  buying something from abroad, they'll give it to you.  if you want  to change that international money into domestic  money, they'll do that for you ok.  so there's some and the price that is sort  of made in that market, is the exchange rate.  you know, there are there are other foreign exchange dealers and  stuff like that, we're going to get them into our story too ok?  i'm, this is sort of a stylized picture to  give you an image of the system as a whole.  and where everything kind of links,  links, links up.  that these prices that we talked about last time, are also hierarchical.  you know, they're about the price of at the  highest level, the next level down, the next level down.  and now we come to the, the issue that i started with.  when you learn economics, you say to yourself, oh, and, you, we try to  obstruct for money the veil of money in order to see this good a and  this good b or exchanging at a relative price because  of the utility functions, the operations functions and so forth  we have extract from all of this money and we  don't even tell you what the goods are, you know?  they're just widgets or whatever and so they're all the same.  okay.  in monetary economics, these prices, as long as these prices  exist you can have the impression that the things they're the prices are  all the same. they're just quantitatively different.  you know, there's a price at which you can exchange securities for deposits.  there's a price at which you can exchange deposits for currency.  there's a price.  and so, you can, you can imagine, that they're all at the same level.  there's a price that makes them quantitative.  quant, this qualitative difference, that i've  been emphasizing, looks like quantitative similarity.  it's just a matter that the prices are moving, and so you get more for,  more of one and more of the other.  this is why a lot of economic theory, the imp, the impulse  of economists often to take what they know, in the supply and demand  world, and just say we'll lets use that for understanding these prices because  it looks like that's what going on here, and they lose the hierarchy.  okay?  you, you, you're abstracting from the hierarchy when you do that.  which i will, that's why i'm starting  with the hierarchy.  to say it may be in normal times, you know, yes it's not so bad to treat that.  there are prices, qualitative different, qualitatively different things, trade  in a way that you can swap back and forth.  just as you can swap, you know, there's a price  for a kidney and there's a price for an army tank.  those seem really very different sorts of things.  so where'd you, and yet they seem the same from the point of  view of the theory of value.  and from a moral point of view, perhaps  they're different but economics makes them the same.  i'm making a different point here.  this is obviously not about, about ethics or something but i'm just trying to.  again, there's a hierarchy in ethics, right, and  so you're used to thinking of hierarchies in ethics.  and there's a hierarchy in money and that may help as an image.  okay, we're almost there.  okay, so here's the system, there's these different instruments,  there's these different institutions, there's these different prices of money.  connect this up to this diagram here.  so the system is fluctuating, it's fluctuating.  scarcity to scarcity to elasticity to scarcity and back again, okay?  and as it's fluctuating, these institutions are standing  in the middle of the of those fluctuations, right,  with one leg in two different levels, right.  left leg down here, the right leg up here.  and when there's an assertion of hierarchy,  you know, you're pulled in two directions, okay.  that this differentiation between your asset side and your  liability side, can cause a big problem for you okay.  if you are long.  ok, if you're long this, and short  this and suddenly this becomes very scarce ok, you are in trouble cause this goes up  in value relative to that and you can be insolvent but you can go out of business.  liquidity kills you quick.  these are liquidity dealers, all of them ok?  and if you cannot, if you cannot actually sell your  books at the end of the day, you are just done.  you're just done.  and they all face, all, all three of these institutions faced this constraint, and so  that's sort of where we're going to start. when we, next week.  is thinking about that liquidity constraint.  security dealers have it a little easier than banks,  because in a crisis they can change the price.  interest rates, asset prices, you know?  you see these plunges in a financial crisis, right?  asset prices plunge and so security dealers  are a, have that degree of flexibility, okay?  in a crisis, banks might like  to say, you know what, i promised to give you currency for these deposits.  but w-, how about 80 cents on the dollar?  you know?  how 'bout that? you know?  they wouldn't be banks anymore, you know, if they did that.  this happens in crises.  similarly, breaking, breaking an exchange rate, a fixed  exchange rate, or the gold par, or something.  that these, that these things come under stress in crises.  and you discover.  it's not, they're not the same kind of thing,  these things are better than these things.  and these prices can go away, they can  just go away, these markets can completely breakdown.  the market makers loose all their money and they just stop markets anymore.  and you cannot go from one level of the hierarchy to another.  in, in a crisis, you can't go not for any price, there  is no price because there is no dealer, there is no market maker.  this is what happens in a financial crisis.  
okay. in 1863.  so all while this, this, these little tender things are going on.  in 1863. the, salmon p chase tries something else.  [sound]  he goes back. i don't really know what the story is.  it would be interesting to go back and find out.  why did he give up on this legal tenders?  maybe there was too much push back or whatever  but, so he tries to go for the bonds again.  he tries to go for the, for the bonds again.  this time what he does is he says to the banking system, i would like to sell  you some of these bonds that really have very  little, very low rate of interest on them, 2%.  i would like you to pay full price for them so that  i'm paying 2% interest and, and that means giving me deposits for them.  that's what i would like you to do.  okay?  so the government goes to the banking system  and says, this is what i would like.  i would like to be issuing these special 2% bonds  and i would like to get deposit accounts for them.  okay.  not going to withdraw these things for gold, because  i know you don't have any gold anymore.  and what you would give me is, is, is legal tenders.  but this is what i would like, like you to do.  why would the banking system agree to that?  okay?  to sweeten the pot, he said to the banking system and i'm going to let you  issue banknotes. banknote  currency, using these bonds as collateral.  using these bonds as collateral.  issue banknote currency, using these bonds as collateral.  i know, these are all kind of new words. okay.  so, let's just play out, let me just play out what actually happened.  what happened is that the government uses these,  and so anyway, the banking system said yes.  okay.  and the government uses these deposit accounts  to buy war goods from the private sector.  okay.  again, let's put a g next to these things so that we know that these are, okay.  so this is minus war goods from the private sector  plus deposit accounts here. plus deposits,  private sector. okay, so.  here is minus deposits of the government. and plus deposits of the private sector.  okay.  so, the government is basically borrowing from  the banking system, and it's borrowing-, and the  banking system is creating new money by  expanding its own balance sheet deposit accounts here.  and the government is using those deposit accounts to pay for war goods.  not legal tenders, but promises to pay legal tenders.  that's what these deposits are now, right, these are promises to pay legal tenders.  okay?  but now, because he gave this nice, because, because they gave this  nice feature to the bonds, that you could use them as collateral for note issue.  anytime the private sector.  now the private sector has all these deposits.  maybe it wants some, wants to, to actually withdraw them.  okay, and when the private sector withdraws them, instead  of paying in the banks own reserves, the legal tenders,  the bank has the right to print notes. that's the point.  so let's have, let's just suppose that  the private sector withdraws all of the deposits.  plus  banknotes.  so these are new bank notes that are issued.  okay.  so these bonds are thought of as  the collateral that is backing these banknotes.  okay. meaning to say that if this bank fails.  okay? these notes which are out in circulation.  these aren't deposit accounts  at the bank. right?  they're out floating around in circulation.  that the, this bank is depositing these bonds at a central location.  so that if you ever wanted to cash in your, your banknote,  you don't have to go back to the bank, which may be bankrupt.  you can take that bank note and you can, you can get a 2% government bond for it.  okay.  that's the sense in which it's collateral.  it's backing, it's backing the value of this note.  okay.  so it's just as if, it's just as if  the the government had borrowed from the banking system  by allowing the banking system to write, to write,  to create money, to just write its own notes.  so these are, these are one step removed from legal tenders.  these are promises to pay legal tender and they're private money, okay?  and  the key thing is that there was only a fixed number of these bonds.  and at the end of the war, that became the money supply that you're seeing up there.  okay.  lawful money in the bank, that's where that money came from.  okay.  that was, that was a, a and there's some gold there.  and there's some gold there too, because there was  resumption of the legal tenders and so forth, okay.  but there's  a fixed supply of, of base money in the country after 1863.  a fixed supply of base money after, after 1863.  it doesn't expand or contract with the business cycle very much.  
this is going to make more sense to you in a little while.  let me now introduce you to the sources and  uses of funds accounts, which we have up here.  has anyone ever heard of the flow of funds accounts?  no one, no one.  they're real accounts, okay, and the fed, the fed gathers them.  and actually people in, particularly financial advisors  pay a lot of attention to them, because  they, they're the source of much of  the information we have about, about financial flows.  let me start  with though microeconomics of it. okay?  there are, we want to distinguish between uses and sources.  and we want to distinguish between the goods and  services account, which i sometimes will say,  call above the line. okay?  and the financial account, which is below the line.  and, there are three different categories in the, in,  that i'm going to distinguish in the financial account.  there's financial assets.  financial liabilities. we're going to treat these separately.  and, money.  [sound]  okay.  so, you can see that we're distinguishing here between money and credit.  so there's this sort of hierarchy of money and credit that is going  on here, and the ultimate payment is going to be, is going to be money here.  these are not t-accounts, because these are, these  are not balance sheets, these are not stocks.  everything here is a flow.  okay?  so when we, when we, when we have as a source of funds.  okay?  when we sell something; that's a cash inflow.  it's a source of funds.  okay? so, so, we, we put here a receipt  [sound].  when we sell something, we receive, we receive, and these are goods.  right?  real goods, so.  and including, by the way, labor.  so when you sell labor, you're getting a wage.  so that's a, that's a receipt. that's a cash inflow.  and when you buy something, it's an expenditure.  here. we're used to the nipa accounts, the  national income and product accounts, which focus on  final sales only, you know, value added.  in flow of funds, we don't particularly care  whether something is a final sale or not.  if it, if it's a sale, it's an in flow.  okay, it's just, it's a source of cash for the individual.  it may not be a source of value for the economy as a whole.  but it's a good, good or a service, or labor.  if we sell a financial asset,  okay, that's a source of funds too.  so, if you have a stock and you sell  it, okay, that's, that's cash coming into, coming into you.  we'll call that decumulation.  just to match accumulation if you buy a stock.  okay?  and financial, financial liabilities if you are as a source of  funds, if you borrow money right, the bank gives you money.  okay?  that's a cash inflow.  so borrowing is a source of funds, and repayment is a use of funds.  repayment of debts. okay?  and money.  okay? and money, okay?  we have a, a pile of money. if we take something off that pile,  that could be a, that's a source of funds. so this is dishoarding.  and this is hoarding, here.  okay?  this is, this is a set of it's a conceptual decumulation.  did i spell that right?  yes this a conceptual framework an it's completely inclusive.  you know, their every transaction is going to fit  into one or the other of these categories.  it's meant, it's meant to be inclusive. it's not leaving, leaving anything out.  okay? it's either and, and, and it will,  so, you can use this.  the, the value of this framework, is that you can use  this to sort your way through pretty complicated kinds of transactions.  okay?  and the, and the rules that order how you sort your way through this, okay, are two.  two rules.  rule one.  all accounting is based on some rules of consistency.  okay?  and rule one, is that every, every, every use  has a corresponding source, and vice versa.  every use has a corresponding source.  and vice versa.  that is to say, you can't, buy a good. okay?  you can't buy a financial asset.  you can't repay debt.  you can't accumulate, a cash balances, without it coming from somewhere.  that's all it's saying.  okay?  and if its coming from somewhere, it has to go somewhere.  so that's the vice versa part.  okay? so that's all its saying.  the other the other rule, which is what  allows us to turn this into macro- economics.  okay?  is it every agent's use is some other agents source, and vice versa.  [sound]  every agents use,  is some other agents  source. this is, this  is actually kind of deep.  okay?  that the, the economy as a whole, every time i,  get a receipt it's somebody's else expenditure.  right.  i'm selling a good, somebody's buying a good.  so that's the sense in which sources, my source is somebody else's use.  if i'm buying a financial asset, i'm  buying it from somebody, they're selling it.  and so, you see how that all works.  and once you appreciate this, you see, you start to see the economy  as this web of, of where depending on whether you're looking from my  point of view, or your point of view, everything, everything is connected.  you know, and you can follow it all, all, all, all along.  [blank_audio]  
you know, the whole system could be set up in this sort of bilateral, bilateral way.  and and a lot of it was before there was, a, a central bank.  typically there would be a, i'll draw a little picture  here, there'd be like these urban banks, money center banks.  and they would have correspondent relations  with banks in the, in the countryside.  okay, so the banks in the  countryside would hold deposits at some big bank in, in, in cleveland  or chicago, there were, there were these money center banks like that.  so i'm showing three cities in my world.  and each of these cities has five banks, in the hinterlands around them.  and so certainly, if you're, if you're paying any of these other banks.  if you're here, and you're paying any of these other banks.  you're just chan, you're just moving deposits in the center bank around, okay?  you're, there, there's nothing else that's happening.  things get a little more complicated when you're talking about,  you know, payments that go between cities, okay?  then there has to be a payment.  that is between the center banks.  okay, so up one layer in the hierarchy, okay.  there has to be a payment if you're try, if you're here, if alpha is here, okay.  and lambda is here, okay, there has to be payment not only with their, with their  own bank, but the money center bank, the  money center bank, and their own, their own bank.  here okay.  and there are banker balances can sort all this out.  so there can be correspondence.  you can have bilateral correspondence relations  between the money center banks as well.  in practice that's not so much how it happened.  it was more hierarchal than that. not bilateral.  but there are some banks, in new york,  okay, which are, which, which all these money centers,  all, all have accounts at, in, in new york.  so it's not like this, it's like,  it's more like this okay.  so that if your, if your, if alpha is paying lambda  okay what involve, what that involves is movement  of some account of their money center bank  with their money center bank in some third bank that's in new york somewhere.  and this  is even simplified there were regional layers and things  like that, but it was a hierarchical system, so getting  used to understanding the payment system in some detail  really helps to build the notion of hierarchy, of netting.  you know, that you, you net out as much as  you can, so that, that the reserves don't have to  flow, and then you create credit systems so the reserves  don't have to flow, and you create bilateral credit systems locally,  and then bilateral credit, you know, higher up, so  it's a whole structure of, that, that is balancing the  elasticity and, and discipline, all the way from the  most, most little bank in the middle of nowhere, okay.  to jp morgan in new york city.  and i mention j p morgan in particular.  okay.  because in new york city there are all of these banks which have deposits from banks  in other places we saw that in that.  set of numbers that in the alan young reading, okay, the, the deposits  from the, from the middle-level banks in the, in the money center banks.  and then there's the problem of the clearing  of the new york banks with each other.  okay, and that's where the clearing house comes in.  the clearing of the biggest, the biggest bank of the country with each other.  
let's think about me buying an apartment from you with a mortgage,  from citibank, my bank, okay, how does this really happen,  well you know they all this credit check and stuff like that.  that's all interesting, but it's not monetary economics, okay?  so just assume all that's fine, they figured that i'm  a professor, i have a tenure, i'm good for it, whatever.  so  citibank is my bank and let's say you bank at chase.  and i am going to buy your tiny little apartment  for some ridiculous amount of money, because this is manhattan.  how do i actually do that?  this is going to involve the fed funds market, believe it or not.  believe it or not. that's the startling thing.  well, the first thing i do, is i get a mortgage from citibank.  and what, and the way citibank gives me that  mortgage is by writing a deposit to my credit.  so, there's plus mortgage, here.  plus deposit here.  [sound]  okay? i haven't even put myself on here.  okay?  on my balance sheet it'll be just the reverse.  right?  i have mortgages of liability, i have this deposit as, as, as an asset.  we're getting used to this i think by now.  so, the way loans are made is by a swap of values with the bank.  the bank says i owe you a million dollars let's make it for a million dollars.  it's a nice apartment, it's 200 square feet.  so, the, the a,  let's make it for a million dollars, just fantasy, okay?  and so i, i say to the bank, i owe  you a million dollars over the next 30 years, okay?  and the bank says to me i owe you a million dollars.  on demand.  okay, that sort of deposit, yes.  okay, but it's a swap of iou's but the timing  is different and the person are signing those iou's is different.  you know, when, when,  citybank signs an iou it's money, okay? when i sign iou it's credit.  so there is a swap of iou's here.  the whole point of this, is to transfer that deposit to you,  okay, so that we can transfer ownership of this apartment to me, okay?  but you have your deposit in another bank here.  so how does that happen?  this is a million dollars, we're not holding  onto a million dollars worth of reserve just waiting in  case i transfer this, there are no reserves here, okay?  so what the fed.  i mean what, what what citibank will do is, when, when they're expecting me  to make this transfer and i'm making this transfer at the closing, all of this,  i can go, they're going to go into the fed funds market, they have  had their credit department, they know that  these payments are coming down, they've been following  this, they've been tracking it, and they  know they have to fund this mortgage, okay?  they have to fund, eventually they're going to package this mortgage with all  kinds of other mortgages, securitize it, sell it to europe, do something.  okay?  we'll do, deal with that later in the class.  but that takes weeks and months.  okay?  this payment has to happen now, and here's how it happens.  okay.  citibank goes into the, goes into the fed funds market.  and it borrows reserves.  a billion of them. and, i'm going to  show it borrow, in order to make it more realistic, not borrowing from chase, okay?  why would chase do this but borrowing from some third party, let's say hsbc.  okay? hsbc is making this fed funds loan.  okay? and it is doing this by running down.  some reserves it happens to have on hand.  okay.  perhaps these are, you know, fictional reserves.  perhaps it's running an overdraft somewhere, you know, itself.  but at any rate, it's, it's making this loan here.  so this is the counterpart of this.  this is the counterpart of that.  and now, i have, the citybank has what it needs in order to make this payment.  right.  it can make the payment this way. minus reserves, minus deposit, right.  okay.  and then over here chase plus reserves plus deposit.  and i'll put you next to that. okay.  so, the bank, is happy to give you a deposit account, why?  because it has money, okay. it is settled.  this thing is settled, okay.  it knows, it's not just saying, i won't let you see that money.  i am going to clear this check.  no, this is all clearing now because we're transferring title, okay.  so this is all clearing right now.  and it's clearing because there are these reserves that  are, that are going back and forth between the banks.  you and i never see these, okay?  it's just, you just, it just moves in between these deposit accounts, okay?  but behind the scenes, its a transfer from one bank's reserve account to another.  but let's push this further, so now chase  has these reserves that aren't paying anything, and  so it might go into the fed funds market, and lend them.  okay?  so, it might sell these reserves and lend them for a future date to hsbc.  okay?  which is borrowing in the fed funds market, here.  and acquiring reserves.  okay. this, there's a couple of  important points about this graph now.  here's the ultimate credit. mortgage.  okay? who lent the money for this creditor?  who lent the money? if you follow through, you say,  well, citibank borrowed from hsbc, who borrowed from  chase. who borrowed from you.  in a certain sense, i bought it from you and you lent me the money for it.  okay?  now, you're, we're, we don't, i don't owe it to you.  i owe it to these intermediaries so if i default, you'll still get your money.  but in terms of the actual source of funds.  okay, it's here, until you spend these, you  can spend these and then somebody else has  to be the source of funds, okay, until  this mortgage gets financed by some pension fund somewhere,  okay, at the moment it's basically been funded through  the payment system, through a expansion of balance sheets.  no one is saved extra money in order to allow me to borrow this, okay.  it's just been a transfer, a bouncy transfer at the moment,  you have transferred your assets from a house okay into a  deposit account okay, i've transferred you know i now have a  house and i also have a mortgage, so i used have zero,  i still have zero, okay, i'll probably put some down payment in there, too.  the other thing i want to point out to you, now, is hsbc.  what is hsbc doing, and why are they doing it?  they're on both side of the market, right?  they're lending fed funds, and they're borrowing fed funds.  and they're, i'm showing them as flat, in terms of their exposure, but they  wouldn't do this unless there was a spread there, okay, that they are lending  at one rate, high rate, and they're borrowing at another rate, a low rate.  hsbc is a new kind of entity, for this class now; hsbc is acting as a dealer.  as a, as a dealer in the fed funds market.  [sound]  okay.  it's, it's making a market, it's quoting prices,  it's saying i'm willing to lend to you at  this rate, i'm willing to borrow from you at  this rate, and it's trying to set those rates.  so that over the course of the day money flows in, money flows out  and they match and i collect on the difference between the net asset value.  sometimes more money flows out than money flows in and i have  to myself find extra, extra funds, or sometimes it's the other way around.  okay.  but i'm as a dealer.  matched book means that i have exactly the same  exposure on this side as i do on that side.  a matched book dealer.  i'm showing hsbc as a matched book dealer here, in the fed funds market.  here, what happens if this million dollar mortgage gets paid to the homeowner?  here, this is who you're talking about and he withdraws that.  so that's 1mm.  that's how stigam writes a million dollars, 1mm.  and now withdraw it, what do you mean by withdraw, in cash?  okay.  in cash that is a demand for, that's an outflow of reserves.  from the banking system of a million dollars.  okay?  chase, probably does not have, a million dollars, in cash.  certainly not in your local branch. okay?  and, but they might be able to accumulate it, somewhere,  and they are promising to, to pay, to pay this.  so they will have to come up with that.  they can, they can take any reserve position they have in at the fed.  you know, if they have a deposit  at the fed, that's what this is, right. this is a deposit at the fed.  they can go to the fed and they can say give me cash for this, and  the fed will give them a million dollars  cash for a million dollars worth of reserves.  and then they give you the cash. so just sort of mechanically.  there is a million dollars of cash downtown in  33 liberty street, okay, and that's where they would get  it from if they didn't have it in their  own, in their own vaults, so, the fed is then,  if you think about, so now i shouldn't draw balance sheets  in the air, okay, so the fed, lets put the fed  in here, the fed would be lowering its reserves by $1  million, and it's just printing a million dollars worth of cash.  it's not printing, it has, it just down there, it's  just putting in the circulation $1 million worth of cash.  so, it's changing the form in which its liabilities  are held, that there is a one more million  worth of cash and one less less million worth of reserves.  this, so these reserves become million dollars, these million dollars  are given to the depositing account that flows out here.  that, last time i talked about an internal drain versus  an external drain, that's an internal drain right, and it  causes no problems, causes no monetary problems because deposit becomes  cash and reserve are the, are, are liabilities of the fed  just the same, no problem.  
the legal construction of this, of this thing is like a collateralized loan.  but it's much more symmetric.  okay?  it's much more symmetric than a normal loan,  normal collateralized loan if you think about it.  you know, the, the, the collateralized that you and  i are most familiar with is the house mortgage, okay?  so, i, the, the, the bank, if i default on my loan, okay,  they have the ra, they have the right, they have claim to my house.  they can take it.  they can sell it.  and use it to recoup the, part of the loan.  all of the loan hopefully if the value of the house is enough.  but it's not easy for them to do it.  they don't actually, they're not in possession of it.  they have to run through foreclosure.  they have to do all this stuff and it takes months and it  takes legal fees and it's clear that they don't really intend to do that.  that's not the nature of this.  okay, whereas this, these are overnight loans for $10 million, okay?  and nobody wants there to be any, any question about this, that you, you own it.  you, you're able to take that security.  and not only do you own it, meaning if  they don't repay, often you own it, you can  [unknown],  you can sell it to somebody.  you know, they, you, they've given you this as security for the loan.  you can sell it to somebody and trade it you know, all day long.  all you are reliable, liable for, is returning it to them  the next day when you, when you, when you promised to.  you have the security, you can, you can trade with it.  just as the, on the other side, you have this money.  and you can spend it.  you can buy something else with it.  you can, you can do whatever you want. so, it's much more symmetric  than, than a standard, than a standard kind of loan.  and who gives margin to who?  okay, because if you think of it, taking  in a security okay as, as as collateral for  a loan the danger of me holding the  security is the value of the security will fall.  the value of the security falls below the value  of the loan.  then there's an incentive for him not to repay me.  okay.  but the reverse is also the case on the other side.  okay?  if the value of the security goes up, okay?  it's in his advantage to say. to, to not return the security.  to hold, to hold onto it, okay?  so who gives margin to who? stiggem, stiggem raises this question.  and she says, and i think it's an, it, this  is an, a sort of interesting deep feature of this market.  it is the person lending money who gets margin.  it's the person lending money who gets margin.  not the person who's lending securities.  it's the, this is part of the hierarchy of money and credit now.  it's the, the money is the better asset.  and they're the ones who can demand,  who can demand collateral, and demand extra security.  and so, what you see. is this phenomenon of the haircut.  that's the extra security.  and the way, the best way to understand this.  and now we're going to get really specific, okay?  she gives an example, on page, 533.  but i'm just going to write down the numbers here.  she says, for example.  a ten year treasury bond is the  security we're going to talk about, and this treasury  bond is trading, right now, at 100 29/32.  that's how they used to quote these prices.  we've moved to the decimal system, but the book is a  little older uh,129 30 seconds, so it's trading a bit above par.  probably because the ten year interest rate is  a little lower than the coupon on this bond.  okay, that why that, why that happens.  so this is its core value in the market here is a 129 30 seconds.  okay.  the person who has this bond wishes to offer  it as collateral in order to borrow money overnight.  okay?  how much money can they borrow? in her example she says the haircut is 2%.  okay? so that means the the your  able to borrow, not 100 29/30 seconds, but a 99.228.  you should do the math for me. okay?  so that's this minus 2%, okay?  this is how much you could use that bond to borrow, there's a 2% haircut there.  what that means is that if, if the, the bond falls in  value by more than 2%, then there is no incentive to default, okay?  but, but there's, but it's an overnight loan  and these prices don't fluctuate necessarily that much.  if they fluctuate more, the haircut's going to be bigger.  you know, you know if you're talking  about a mortgage backed security, it's not going to  be a 2% haircut, it's going to be a 5% or a 10% or a 50% haircut.  and in a crisis maybe they're not acceptable at all, okay?  so the haircut is  negotiated first.  how much money will you lend and it has to do with the volatility of the price.  you can see, and you can see why. so that's the first thing.  and then the question is, what is the interest rate going to be?  and so, and that's what we call the repo rate, and the repo rate is negotiated.  and she says, it's 4.92 %, i think it  was, 4.92%.  that's an annualized rate. we're only, we're only going to  be applying that rate to one day. it's an overnight, overnight repo.  so what happens is, you borrow $99, or, or this is a  million dollar bond, so this is $990,000, okay?  and you repay what? tomorrow.  you repay the  principle, 99.228 plus interest.  and the, and the, the convention in the money market is, is this.  that you, it's, it's a straight interest, not compound interest.  so, it's 0.0492.  okay, times one over 360 because it's one day.  it's, it's overnight.  if it was three days that would be a three, okay,  and if it was a week that would be a seven, okay.  this is not like some of the interest rate formulas you, you're used  to seeing where it would be compound, you'd be raising it to a power.  also note that they're treating the year as if it has 360 days in it.  okay? even though it doesn't, okay?  so these are just quoting conventions, okay?  you can, you can  understand that the market knows this and it can change this  number to take account of the fact of this quoting convention.  but it's a,it's a quoting convention that is since time  in the memory i suppose and this can't be changed okay?  this is how things reported in money markets.  now in money markets this sort of thing doesn't make that much difference.  it makes just pennies, okay because it's really overnight.  it's not very, very much interesting you're  talking about here.  so the difference between 360 and 365, the difference in compound interest.  is not, doesn't amount to, to more than the fourth decimal point, but it amounts  to something and so you want to get this right if you're trading in this market.  if you do this math, which i did myself, you come up, and i hope,  i did it using my calculator, so i hope i punched in the numbers right,  you come up with 99.228 137.  so, almost the same. so,  you borrow this much, and then the next day, you return this much.  but if this is a million dollar bond, what you're talking about is $137.00.  $137 of interest. so it costs you  $137 to borrow a million dollars overnight, that's  what the repo market is doing for you, okay?  notice how the haircuts are another  way of making heterogeneous collateral homogeneous.  saying, this one will give you a 2% haircut this one will give  you a 10% haircut, we will apply the same repo rate to them all.  yes?  >> uh,when someone loans out money and their securities are earned.  >> mm-hm.  >> have to negotiate for a haircut, aren't they under the impression?  i mean if they accept that security then  they're taking a short position makes it easy then  just sell it and then when they have to  return the security they buy at a lower price.  so why do they get, why do they necessarily get the margin  when it should be implied that they're taking the short position and  they can easily just sell it and buy it back if they needed to?  >> mm-hm, well that's the puzzle.  >> that's the puzzle that she raises in the book.  it just is never the case. it's never the case.  it's the person who has money, who is the one who can demand margin.  i mean, both sides can try, and in many swaps.  both sides put up margin.  you know the, it's, it's, it's typical in, in swaps  that both, that both sides have to put up margin.  but in repo, no.  it's, it's the side that is borrowing money, borrowing money  that has to put up, that has to put up margin.  to me, this tells you.  that money that that that that the demand for  for liquidity for borrowing money is what driving this.  this is this is the short side of that  market you know, that people are willing to pay  up in order to get money, they are not  willing to pay up in order to get collateral.  so that's  why the margin is this way.  
let me return to where, what i was  saying about whats special about the eurodollar market.  these are banks, but the reserves these banks hold are  not bank, are not reserve that are held at the fed.  they reserves held at some new york bank typically.  some bank that holds it reserve at the fed.  so, they are, there's a discipline quality there.  okay, that since you can't readily get access to reserves, you've  got to be a little more careful than the american banks  who can borrow in the fed funds market, number one, and  number two, if they can't, they can borrow with the fed.  you know.  so the fed will backstop them, that's the whole point.  so, these banks can't do that.  okay.  their backstop is the ecb or something, and that's no good.  the ecb can't print dollars.  so, so they have more of a discipline  problem than the american banks, than, than onshore banks.  okay?  got that?  and they respond to this by being a lot more careful about lining up.  their cash flows in time, a lot more careful than american  banks. so that these deposits are typically  deposits to a specific date. they're term deposits.  or say, you can, this is a, maybe a one  month deposit okay, and this loan is a six month loan.  okay and these euro dollar deposits may be for for three months,  kay.  but in, in every case, there's a cash flow on a particular date.  a particular date. and the banks know these dates.  they pay very close attention to these dates.  and not only do they try to have match book in terms of i want to have as many  dollar deposits, you know, $10 million, as i have dollar loans, $10 million .  i want to make sure that they're to the same dates.  okay.  because having them to the same dates means when i need  to make a payment, somebody needs to make a payment to me.  okay.  so that i can just take that money and move it.  okay.  now it's not always going to happen that people  make payments when they say they're going to make payments.  so you need reserves. and you need all that, you know.  but you can try.  you can try and you can line up these things in time.  and this is,  this is the motivation for understanding a lot of what this chapter's about.  these things about foreign rated agreements, and  then foreign exchange agreements, and things like that.  that these, that they're attempts to line up the  cash in flow and the cash out flow in time.  okay?  not just so say agre amount of dollars and agre amount dollars both  sides but making sure that tomorrow these dollars going to come in and these dollars  are going to go out and next day the next  day we think about this months ahead a time.  we look at this instruments.  we know can keep track of it.  so we're managing the liquidity. and you're managing liquidity  using some of these things called forward rate agreements.  forward rate agreement.  which is pronounced fra.  steven talks about this and if you talked to anybody in  the markets about this they'll say, oh, well, what this is is  you're promising to pay to another bank the difference between libor  and some fixed rate that you determine now, the forward rate, okay.  at some future date.  so three months from now, if libor is higher than this number, you pay me.  if it's lower than this number, i pay you. and that's what a forward  rate agreement. so it's a derivative.  okay, it's a bet on what's going to happen to libor or relative death.  okay.  but, to, to explain it that way, that is what it is.  that's fine, okay.  that's all true, okay, but it doesn't really help us.  understand the mechanics, it doesn't help us link  it to banking, what's it doing for us,  in banking; it sounds like it's about speculation  on what's going to happen to libor, and  you have one view and i have anther view, okay.  you can use them for that, okay, but i don't that's why they exist.  they exist to help banks line up their payments in time, and to see that we need  to understand the implicit balance sheet entries that relying behind the prox.  so let me start with that, okay. let's think about two  banks: bank x and bank y.  okay.  [noise]  this one's going to be the forward borrower,  this one's going to be the forward lender.  so their just like, over, over there, their trying to arrange cash  flows, but their trying to arrange them ahead of time in the future.  [cough]  bank x let's say anticipates that two months from now it will  be making a loan for a three month term. two months from now.  so it knows that it wants money to fund that, it wants  to arrange the funding for that, now that's a cash out flow.  when you make a loan then they could used to draw that and take  it away.  so you want to make sure you have funding for that now.  this is quit typical, you talk to your corporate customers and  you say what is your anticipated cash needs and so forth.  and you might even sign an agreement on what you are going to lend it to them.  what really you're going to lend it to them two months from now.  okay.  so they know this is happening, but they, they, they're not quite sure.  they need to line up some funding.  on the other hand, bank y, let's say, just to make it all work,  okay, is in exactly the opposite position. okay?  they know they're going to get a deposit, okay?  flow, inflow, two, two months from now, and they want to make  sure they lock in some, something to use it for, you know.  some, some use of funds. that pays well.  okay?  how can they do this just with balance sheet entries?  here's how.  suppose that they just swap ious.  all banking is a swap of ious.  so even if it looks like a complicated little derivative.  okay? it's a swap of iou's, okay?  how, in what sense is this a swap of iou's?  suppose that bank x made a two month deposit  in bank y  of a million dollars or something. okay.  and bank y made a five month deposit  in bank x for a million dollars.  okay?  you can see that neither one of them needs  to actually pay anything to anybody now at all.  'cuz it's a swap of ious.  i lent you a million dollars, you lent me a million dollars.  okay?  and that's it.  there is s difference, however, in when these loans get paid back, okay?  so nothing happens at time zero.  right?  no cash flows happen at time zero. we, we've just swapped  ious for different terms, okay. but at time two months,  okay. this deposit matures.  remember i told you that in the euro  dollar market these deposits are to particular terms.  so there's a particular day, at which this deposit matures.  and when this matures, bank y has to make a payment,  it's a liability, has to make a payment to bank x.  and that's good because bank x needs to make this loan.  okay, so bank x makes this loan for three months.  [sound]  using the funds that are coming from bank y.  and where's the funds coming from bank for bank y?  this matures, there was this this deposit that was coming in, deposit inflow.  [sound]  so the deposit from out side is replacing the two months deposit.  okay and the deposit outflow for the actual loan is replacing  that at maturity,  right? now.  and so, the, the, this is hot, so, so i've shown you mechanically how  by swapping iou's now, you can lock in the source of funds in time, okay.  that there;s going to be a flow of funds from  bank y to bank x two months from now, okay.  you can lock that in, the timing. and you can do these any dates.  you know, any dates at all.  so, you can make this very, very sophisticated.  there are euro-dollar deposits to any date you  want, okay, so you can really fine-tune this,  just with balance sheet entries.  you can create that kind of, you can manipulate  the timing of the cash in-flows and cash out-flows.  so now the question is well but what is the rate of interest on this?  and i'm going to say, let us say, since there was no cash changing hands for the  first two months okay, what's really happening, is  let's say they had the same interest rate.  and i'm calling that f for forward, so what you winding  up doing is funding this three month loan for f percent.  okay?  an fu it this is an agreement between the two banks okay  and i'm going to say where f comes from in a minute.  but what they the x is doing is funding this three month loan  for this rate of interest so its locking in a funding rate and  what bank y is doing is locking in an investment rate.  okay?  that it, it, the deposits are coming in and it  knows it's going to be able to invest them at f percent.  even if the three month liable rate is lower than that by that time.  it's locked it in beforehand. okay?  it has, it has an investment, and so, it's hoping to make a profit on that.  
giving you this image of all these different banks, each  one of which is independtly looking at their own cash flow.  you know, they're not looking anywhere else,  they're just looking at their own balance sheet  and seeing cash in, cash out, and they're  moving their discount rate in response to that.  the effect of that is coordination of all the banks.  okay?  they're going to wind up moving their rates sort of in tandem with each other.  because whoever  is, has the lowest rate, okay whoever has  the lowest rate is paying the highest price.  all the discounts are going to go there, so they're going to be spread out.  all their, their going to spread out and they're going to coordinate  these rates are going to be lined up with each other.  some are going to be a little off the market  rate of interest because they're trying to influence the flow.  someone a little off in the other direction  there trying to influence but there's going to be  a market rate of interest that is going to  be established here and that market rate of interest  is itself going to move around, okay.  the market rate.  [sound]  of interest  is going to move around,  okay, over time depending on the demands by firms for discounting, okay.  and the, and the actions of the banks you know how  much they do with deposit accounts and acceptances, how much they're willing  to hold, all these decisions by, by everyone in the economy  are going to show up through this, this, this kind of system.  they're going to show up in the money, in the money market  rate of interest.  that is, that is uniform across the economy.  this is, this in is the london money market, lombard street.  the badge they're writing about.  and the lombard street is not just the money market.  [inaudible]  for firm a and firm b. world merchants.  it's the money market for the world, people who are trading,  firm a and firm b, might be two different countries, okay.  and they are discounting their bills in london.  the london money market was the world money market.  also, and so the market  rate of interest, that's fluctuating here, is  the world rate of interest, that's fluctuating here.  in balances, in payments, in all that sort of thing, that happen anywhere  in the world, show up, in the money market rate of interest, in london.  in the 19th century.  
[sound].  i said, the dealers  are both long and short. they're looking to say, if i'm wrong  in the treasury bond market, i'm going to be short in the treasure bill market.  in doing this, they are arbitrage is,  is transporting liquidity from one market to another.  okay.  if every single security had to have its own dedicated dealer and  its, with their own dedicated capital, you would see much less liquid markets.  what you have is, is dealers are able to make to markets for bonds because they're  making markets for bills on the other side  and they're moving liquidity around in the system.  arbitrage links together all markets.  okay.  so that it, so that this is a macroeconomic  concept is what i'm, is what i'm getting at here.  it's not just market by market, it's a macroeconomic concept, and as  always, dealers are thinking you know, where shall i use my scarce resources.  which market shall i inv-, you know, make, and which ones shall i avoid.  and so they're looking.  where, where's, where can i get a nice wide spread?  you  know?  and, and i don't have to face a lot of competition.  so they're, they're moving around.  and in doing this, the, the liquidity that we  see in the world is coming from dealers which  are, are, are making these sorts of profit calculations  and asking themselves, where which markets should i make?  which ones should i stay away from? so, there's a range.  some markets have a, have a very  widespread, some markets have a very thin spread.  some markets have a very steep asset curve, like that, so that they're,  you know, if you really trade in size, the price is going to move.  okay?  some have very flat.  treasury bill markets are pretty flat.  you know they're no-, they're not, they're not you don't,  you can trade in huge volumes and it doesn't move the  price very much, so there are different kinds of markets  but dealers are choosing which of these markets to engage in.  and the, the, there's a range of liquidity, but at the same  time there is macroeconomic liquidity fluctuations  that move all of these prices.  at the same, at the same time.  let us now, i'd mentioned before, this idea of perfect arbitrage.  perfect arbitrage  and perfect liquidity.  one idealization of financial markets,  is to imagine that it's  possible to arbitrage any slight difference in price.  notice whats, what this dealer model is showing you.  this price is moving around, depending on the dealer  inventory, not depending on the fundamental value of the asset.  you know.  it, the dealer is worried that you might know something  that they don't know, and that's why they're lowering the price.  but they don't know that you know something that they don't know.  all they know  is that they have big inventories, and they don't like that.  and so they lower the price.  okay. and similarly over here.  so this is a model in which the provision of  liquidity to the market moves prices away from their fundamental values.  so let's just think, what would, if we, if we  want to assign a fundamental value, you might say, it's here.  you know, and so, in the bid ask  spread, when the dealer has no inventory at all, that's the fundamental value.  [sound]  okay?  any time the dealer has an inventory, the price is wrong, that means.  and the price is, is moving away from fundamental value.  so the abstraction that underlies much of asset  pricing if you took a financial markets course.  okay, we often assume and of course it's fine for some purposes,  because you have to abstract from small things that don't matter to you.  and so if you want to link what you're learning  in this course to what you learned in financial markets.  okay, in, in, in financial markets, it's as if the outside spread is right there.  meaning, so that's a limit, so, so you, you  squash the inside spread to zero because the fundamental  traders are saying, any time the price goes just  a tiny bit above that, okay, i'm a seller here.  any time the price goes just a tiny bit below this fundamental value, i'm a buyer.  this is price here. i should price on that.  yeah, i put price on that axis there.  this is price. so this is the perfect arbitrage case.  perfect liquidity.  liquidity is a free good. it's abundant.  okay?  because you can see in a world like this, remember how we defined market liquidity?  the ability to trade quickly, in volume, without  moving the price will here this easily, you know.  i f there is an arbitrary pressure on the  other side, then any time the price comes to tiny  bit, they are willing to take the other side  because they'll say, oh, that's not the fundamental value anymore.  so,  i'm going to, i'm going to take that and that or reap  that and competition in that will drive those spreads to zero.  this is the abstraction on which most asset pricing theories are based.  this is also the abstraction on which most general equilibrium theory is, is based.  so there's not liquidity is a free good in, in general equilibrium theory.  traynor's pointing out that once you investigate  the actual, the actual mechanics behind your ability to trade in liquid markets.  you realize that your ability to trade in liquid markets is, is brought about  by the fact that the price you're getting is different from the fundamental value.  you're trading at the wrong price.  your ability to trade, comes from the fact that you're trading at the wrong price.  at, at a, at a, at a, at a price that's, that's not, not the fundamental price.  now, traynor was a good buddy of fisher black.  the famous fisher black of black-shulls option pricing.  and fisher learned this model.  this was 1987 that, that traynor, traynor published this model.  and when fisher  became, he, he went and became a partner at goldman  sachs and he was also president of the american finance association.  and he made a famous speech, there called noise.  and in this speech he stood up and he said,to the  assembled multitudes, this is the american finance associations here in new york.  said, you know i'm a big believer in efficient markets.  usually efficient markets mean  that the price is equal to the fundamental value.  he says i'm a big believer in efficient markets, i am.  i think that price, is, is within a factor of  2 of fundamental value, 90% of the time. okay.  within a factor of 2 a fundamental value. that's a big factor.  you know, that's, that's, that's the outside spread.  okay.  that's what, that's what traynor taught him.  like, be careful.  the price you're seeing, is within a factor of 2 of the fundamental value.  unless you know the dealer inventories and so  therefore you know whether, where, where the price is.  the price you're seeing is, is either here, or it's there.  it's within a factor of two, of fundamental value.  90 percent of the time, only 90 percent of the time.  so it  could be even worse than that, okay, when you hit this outside spread.  there are air pockets and things like that so,  so this is the actual world we live in.  liquidity is not a free good, okay.  it is provided for a profit by dealers, okay, and and it fluctuates.  the quantity of it fluctuates. and it moves asset prices around.  okay. we saw that in the financial crisis.  okay.  and, and we're seeing it, and we're seeing it now.  it's a big deal.  money and banking matters.  it's not just plumbing behind the scenes that we  can abstract from for our beautiful theories of value.  okay. it matters for asset pricing.  it matters for income and employment.  it matters for business cycles.  this is why this course, this course matters because this  is not the world we live in.  this is the world we live in, here.  
[sound].  how is it that a bank makes a market between deposit and currency.  that it can't move the spread around, it's got to be tight,  it gotta be all in one, it can move a price around.  so, so here's the, here's the thing.  remember how we thought a security dealers.  there's, there's this gestalt switch. one one side, they're security dealers.  on the other, they're money dealers.  okay, now, banks.  on one side, they're money dealers, on the  other side, they operate the payment system, okay?  these two things are, are complementary activities.  and it's the joint part of it, okay?  those two together, that is profitable, okay?  that's the thing.  so, you ask yourself, so i said there's  two questions, how is that banks are able to  do this, you know, given that they don't have any ability.  well, now we know, because all of the slack is taken up in the money market.  you know, all of their ability to  expand their balance sheet, contract their balance  sheet, get the reserves of cash when they need it and stuff like that.  so it's, it's, it, all the slack is take, it's the operation in  the money market that lets them make par in the payment system, okay?  why is it  profitable to do this, okay? same reason.  the operation in the money market is a profitable thing.  you're, you're, you're, there's a, there's a  spread there that you're taking advantage of, okay?  and so you're, you're making money on this.  you may not, the payment part of your business, okay?  maybe a loser, but your, these businesses are linked,  they're both, they're both on the same balance sheet.  and so the net of  it, is, is profitable.  and the same thing with banks as with security dealers remember, i said.  so maybe that's the third point.  that the size of your security exposure doesn't have  anything to do with the size of your funding exposure.  you know, you can move these things back and forth and i think the same  is true of, of banks in the money and market and the, and the paying system.  so there are, there are these margins that you can, that you can move around on.  
two stages of the argument, i've shown you sort of normal monetary policy.  and now i've shown you normal market fluctuation.  okay.  that monetary policy isn't doing anything about.  where's the fed here.  there's no fed.  okay, it's all absorbed in the private banking system.  okay?  so the fed funds rate just stays where it is and everything, everything is fine.  and we never see this.  the central bank doesn't, doesn't, doesn't intervene, intervene here.  but what if, okay, it's a really, big shock?  okay and, it, the dealers are not able to,  it, it starts to move the dealers, into, into a  position where they're anxious about this, or move the banks  into a position where they're anxious issues about those, okay.  and there's a very big shock that's when the fed can come into play.  i said there's these asset price distortions, okay?  the world that badget knew.  we're talking about a world where the central bank, the bank of  england had a bank rate that it's set above the market interest rate.  and said well if things ever get so bad you need to borrow money from  any i'm happy to lend it to you, but it's going to cost you and i'm setting  this rate, well the point, the way to think about that is, you know,  that there's the central bank is setting an interest rate sort of like that.  okay.  so that if interest rates could go, you know, if  the market on its own would cause price, cause, cause  rates to spike above this, the central bank becomes the,  the, the lender of last resort to, to, to the market.  and the the  balance sheet look like, like, like this that the  bank can lend more to the dealers, help the dealers.  okay?  by borrowing from the borrowing reserves for itself from the.  fed. if the fed is willing to back-stopping  the banks, the banks are more willing to  back-stop the dealers, okay? that's the point.  okay and this supports this abnormal, larger  shock and keeps it within bounds, okay.  this is basically lender of last resort sort of operations.  you know when the shocks  are too large for the private market to absorb and you  see, and the way you see, the way you know that.  as you see, really, these, these, these market rates of interest spiking.  or asset prices plummeting, or something.  it's possible that the central bank can put a floor on all of this by  acting as a lender of last resort in, in this, in this, in this way.  classic lender of last resort. activity.  in essence, it's backstopping the short positions that the bank has in money,  the liquidity risk it's taking on by having short positions in money itself.  it's creating more money by, a, and you can't but, but these  short positions, the fed can't run into trouble with, okay, because it's the  ultimate money, at least domestically. we haven't done internationally yet.  okay.  so that's why the fed is able to relieve a crisis.  okay.  because what is, what is a crisis you know, this is the crisis.  everyone wants deposits. everyone wants money.  okay.  and they don't want securities.  well, it has to add up in the economy, right.  the, these securities have to go somewhere and  the way that the lender of last resort works  is that the securities that people don't want get  absorbed into the financial sector, and the cash that  people do want gets created by the financial sector,  and used to fund the positions in the security.  that's how it works.  see there's expansion of the balance through the dealers.  there is expansion of the bank and there  is the expansion ultimately of, of the fed.  in doing so the fed is operating as the money market dealer  it's supporting the behaviour.  of all of these people here, here, and here.  okay.  [blank_audio]  
so, so far, i've been treating, i've been thinking about the banking system, as if  it's made up of these profit maximizing kinds of.  i mean, we, we haven't really addressed that, you know?  these people, these institutions, securities dealers, banks.  you know, they're not in this for their health, right?  they're, they're, they're do, they're not doing it, you know, creating liquidity.  to be nice to us or something.  to help us trade apple stock, isn't that nice?  no they're doing it to make money, okay. and they're motivated by by profit.  and that that will, and we'll analyze how do you make profit by making markets.  what is the source of that profit?  okay, we will do that in this course. what i want to emphasize though.  is that one entity.  once the central bank becomes not a private banker's bank but  actually is sort of public entity, an agent of the state,  an agent of the people,  [cough]  it doesn't necessarily focus entirely on profit maximization  or maybe not entirely on short term profit maximization.  this happened over time.  the bank of england was a private bank for a long time but because it's sitting at  the top of the hierarchy, sitting at the top  of the hierarchy, and its noting this fluctuation, okay?  and it's noting when things get really really  bad, what people really want are my own liabilities.  you  know.  i have the best liabilities in the system, and so, in  a certain way, i can help them out if i want to.  you know.  and lender of last resort, badge or jp morgan  in, in, in united states helping out his friends.  okay?  he was essential a private central bank, before we got the fed.  okay?  so, you could do this, in a, in a profit  maximizing way as jp morgan maybe did okay in 1907  but once you realize that there's this sort of quasi-public function  of the central bank up at the top, particularly managing these turning  points, okay, there's this idea that some of these entities might be focusing  on short term profit maximization. profit, max,  maximization. and  others might be focused on economic stability.  making sure that the system doesn't collapse.  lender of last resort is the ultimate making sure the system doesn't collapse.  lender of last resort is saying when the principle of  scaracity is causing the economy to melt down, the market  makers are ceasing to make markets, there's no, and so  therefore nobody can trade and the whole system is in disarray.  okay.  i can, because i'm at the top of the system,  introduce a little elasticity.  okay, because i can accept securities as collateral for expanding the money supply.  something like that.  so i can join the layers of the hierarchy that  have all broken down because the market makers aren't making markets.  that's what lender of last resort is, okay?  that's an economic stability function.  and over time, central banks have come to,  to, to accept that, and to say that's our job.  that is evolved over time, that role  of economic stabilization, it's evolved over time.  what do central banks do?  what do central banks do? the most primitive,  you know, if you look back in history one thing that,  obviously, a central bank has to worry about is the exchange rate.  so the, the mint par of interna, and you  could just say that's that's the central bank's job,  is to just defend the exchange rate and let  the whole rest of the economy go to hell, okay?  there are central banks that have done that, okay, but they've  come to realize that that's not such a good idea, okay?  that, they will be, they, if the whole rest of the economy goes to hell,  they're going to be sucked down with it, okay?  so, they might expand their their remit to say, well we  have some responsibility also for helping the banking system maintain par.  okay so, that when they are experiencing a run, people want more currency and they  don't want deposits.  we're the central bank. we can help out because we can  create currency so we can help out. so central banks take responsibility for  financial stability. bagehot's book, lombard street okay, was  in fact i have it here. bagehot's book, lombard street.  a description of the money market here. this is a, got this a used book.  merry christmas to father from ed, 1907.  i love that, 1907. financial crisis of 1907.  some ed is giving his father the key  to understanding what's happeinign in the financial crisis.  the lombard street a description of the money market  pounce your length pence here is what that's about.  so it's about the london money market, and what bagehot, what bagehot tried to  tried to convince the world with this book ok,  is that central banks, that the bank of england okay,  a private central bank had in fact, during previous  of crisis been acting as a lender of last resort.  it is sort of evolved in that way without intending to.  okay?  and that it should bring us up to consciousness and embrace it.  and say what we are going to do in a financial  crisis is lend freely, at a high price against good collateral.  that's what we're going to do and you should just embrace that.  it was very controversial when he first published this, then it became orthodoxy.  okay that central banks all say yes this is all orthodoxy we must do this.  what i want to draw your attention to now is that once you have embraced that.  and said that's what we're going to do. you know.  if, if, if we get to the ultimate  scarcity of ultimate money, and this is causing trouble,  that the economy's breaking down, we are going to step in, okay.  that, then, makes the bank, if you've taken that  responsibility onto yourself, okay, that then makes you want to say.  you know, it would be kind of good if we could prevent  ever getting to that point in the first place actually, you know?  if somehow, we could intervene in the economy before it got that bad,  we, we, we know that it's going to be all on our balance sheet,  you know, if we get there. so let's try to have monetary policy.  this is actually the origin of monetary  policy, the notion that by manipulating the interest  rate, or something like that, you can somehow  prevent this fluctuation, okay, from getting too extreme.  you can lean against the wind.  you, when it, when it gets too boomy, you raise interest rates,  you try to implement scarcity when the economy is all about elasticity.  and then on the other side, when it's all collapsed, you know when it's all,  when the economy is all about discipline,  you try to implement some s-s-some elasticity, okay?  so this counter-cyclical kind of effect, counter-cyclical  policy comes from the  inevitability of thinking, of hoping that you can do something about that.  it comes from taking responsibility for the crisis.  that you're going to intervene in the crisis so let's try to prevent a crisis.  and not just counter-cyclical policy but also potential policy.  let's try to regulate banks and make sure they don't get overextended.  let's make sure they don't buy crap assets.  let's do, you know, all this stuff that you see as regulation.  is ultimately coming, from the fact that the central bank is  taking responsibility for the ultimate, for the ultimate crisis, so let's  try to prevent this crisis from happening in, in, in the first place.  how does the central bank do that? this is my last image for you.  interest rates. the central bank intervenes.  most central banks intervene, by manipulating  a very short term interest rate.  the fed funds rate in the united states,  some policy rate, overnight rate, very short term rate.  there's a, a term structure of interest rates.  that typically looks something like this. okay?  so down here at the short end you're talking  about overnight money, one day, okay?  and out here at the long end, you're talking about 30 year treasury bonds.  okay?  this is this is called the term structure of interest rates.  here at the short end, we have the policy rate.  okay?  here at the long end. okay, we have the market rate.  okay.  in general, private markets, security markets,  these are securities, 30 year bonds, right?  so, private market securities are determining these rates here, okay,  and central banks are determining these rates here.  so who wins?  okay?  there's this theory, which you've probably seen in other  other economics classes, the expectations theory of the term structure.  okay?  which is to say well, the 30 year bond  should just be the rate, the yield on the  year bond really should just be the expected overnight rate  for the next 30 years you know, just rolled over.  it should be exactly equal to that and  this theory is wrong, okay, it, it, empirically wrong.  it's rejected basically all the time but we don't,  economists don't have a very good understanding of why actually.  we're going to talk about that in this class.  it's the sort of thing, it seems like arbitrage.  it should be, why would it be rejected?  it seems like a really  should be true. but it is not true, empirically.  and that tells you that there's something else going on here,  and i'm going to argue that it has to do with liquidity, okay.  but we need to get clear about what liquidity  means before i can make these kinds of arguments.  what i'm emphasizing right now at the beginning big picture okay,  is that we have a policy rate, we have a market rate.  policy is trying to move the market around,  okay by moving this interest rate around but, but the  market is also creating constraints on what policy can do.  you can't mo, you can't make the market do just  anything you want but on the other hand, if you  let the market dictate what you, what you do, you're  just allo, you're just accepting the hierarchy as it is.  monetary policy is all about  creating an artificial, hierarchy  [sound]  of money and credit.  [sound]  okay? partly, you could see that in this.  remember that hierarchy i told you, it was  like gold at the top, then currency, deposits, securities.  well here, we have basically overnight money at the feds, so this is currency.  okay. and here's securities.  okay.  and the fed is, its attempt to influence the term,  this pyramid, okay. it plays out in these prices.  it's an attempt to influence the prices of these securities out, out here.  and the, the steepness of that.  when a, when a central bank wants to impose  more discipline, okay, what you'll see is this, okay?  a negatively sloped term structure where short  term money i-i-is ridiculously expensive, more expensive  than long term money. this is ultimate scarcity, and  when it wants to make the pyramid more elastic.  short term interest rates are lowered way below long term interest rates.  so the attempts what we call monetary  policy is really the attempt of the central  bank to, to, to say well the system has a certain balance between elasticity and  [unknown]  right now. but i don't like it.  okay? i think it should be more elastic.  i think it should be less elastic, you know?  so monetary policy is about, is about that, is  about choosing where, where, where to be on that.  and there's politics about that and all of that, okay, and we can talk  something about that but the actual mechanics  of it are pretty interesting by themselves.  and that's what mostly this course is about, is to really try to understand.  this seems a very thin reed to hang, hang your whole margin policy on.  an overnight interest rate.  what is the connection?  how do you, how does changing that rate do anything  to the pyramid, where, where exactly is the transition mechanism?  the transmission mechanism of monetary policy how does that really work?  the market is enormous remember this pyramid, right?  the credit market is enormous,  really really enormous.  how is it that puny little fed, okay, can have any any weight on it at all?  any influence on it at all.  i think really it's a it's a serious question.  once we get inside the system, and we understand we'll  we'll be able to ask those questions more precisely.  what i want to leave you with here is the evolution  over time of the role of the central bank. from defending the exchange rate,  defending par, to more broad concerns about economic stability.  ultimately, there was a period of time when the  central bank thought, maybe we can eliminate the business cycle.  remember, i said, this fluctuation thing happens at all timescales, okay?  maybe, the central bank  can create an artificial hierarchy and just eliminate the business cycle.  whenever it looks like it's going to  slacken, we'll create more elasticity, maybe.  that was an ambition.  one of the central question we're going to  be concerned with in this course, this semester,  is what is the proper role of a central bank today, in this financial crisis.  we started today by talking about mario droghi and  his attempt to put a floor under the crisis that is happening in  europe by putting a floor under the price of short term peripheral bills, okay.  by buying them himself.  he was being a security dealer. he's buying.  portu, portugese debt, he's buying spanish debt, he's buying italian debt, okay?  this is, this is a new role.  he's not supposed  to do this.  it wasn't anticipated he was going to do this.  this is a new role.  similarly, when the fed, in our crisis, 2007, it  bought a trillion dollars worth of mortgage backed securities.  there had never been any mortgage backed  securities on the balance sheet of the fed.  not since 1913, never, there never been mortgage  backed security on the balance sheet of the fed.  and suddenly in three months there's a trillion dollars worth.  okay?  so i'm just alerting you, that we're living  in a brave new world where we're reinventing  trying to figure out what is the appropriate role of the central bank.  for our modern times.  for our modern, global financial system, okay?  for the shadow banking system, for all that, you know.  and we don't know the answer.  we don't know the answer. we are going to be, we're making it up.  the central banks are all kind of just reacting, okay.  but we're living in a badgett moment.  badgett, was writing in 1873, when he looked back.  and he said, all this stuff you were doing.  it's lender of last resort and you done good, okay.  bring it, bring it up, bring it up to consciousness and embrace it.  lend freely at a high interest rate against good collateral  during a crisis and you won't have any crisis anymore.  you'll be able to put a floor on them all the time.  we don't have a simple rule like that anymore for  the world that we, that we're, that we're living in.  and we're looking for one. so that's part  of what this, this course is about is that, is that sort of search.  and seeing how this kind of rule is emerging in practice.  what are central banks actually doing?  they're responding to where the stresses are.  step back.  what did they actually do, and why did it work?  or what did they do and why didn't it work?  you know.  there's lessons to be learned from this crisis.  and the clock is ticking. we don't, we don't have a lot of time.  there's a lotta, there, there, the stakes are pretty,  are pretty high.  so, that's what that's what this course is, is all about.  and i will i'll leave it there. leave it there.  any questions, or?  [inaudible]  operation twist he's asking about. what he means is this, that the fed.  the fed has been entering in to buy, the long-term bond markets, okay.  it has been buying long-term bonds.  it has not been sticking with just fixing the overnight interest rate.  and so, yes, there is, there, that is an  attempt to influence this shape of this, of this pyramid.  whether it's been very effective or not is,  and even what the mechanism is.  there's a lot of debate about if it's been effective, why has it been effective?  nobody really knows.  i have a view on that which we'll get to later later on.  
the consequence of that was financial instability, and  let me now explain how that, how that worked.  okay?  look at, look at these numbers up here.  almost all of the deposits you can see are in the country banks.  that's the big number there,  2,627,000,000, right, deposit acounts okay.  these deposits, the reserves, of those country banks, are, are, are partly  in, in notes, but mostly in deposits in other  banks in the, in the, in the money centers.  now what happened?  ag-, the united states was an agricultural country,  very much so, at this time, and that  meant that there was a strong cyclical character  to the demand for money, the demand for notes.  at, at, crop harvesting time, the farmers would withdraw from their deposits and  they needed notes okay, in order to, in order to move the crops.  and young mentions in this article $50 million, okay.  doesn't sound like that much.  okay, but, just think about what happens now.  look at this chart here.  imagine that of this 2,000,000,627 50  million dollars is withdrawn, is withdrawn.  okay that requires the country banks to pull 50 million  dollars, let us say, from new york, deposits in a new york bank.  those 50 million dollars, however, the total reserves  being held by those new york banks are 221.  so that's 25% of their reserves.  and now they have to contract credit or  they have to get more reserves from somewhere.  okay.  let me write some of this down, this is what causes  the financial crisis.  [sound]  seasonal instability.  [sound]  okay, the country banks  the country farmers first withdraw $50 million in cash.  okay, from their local banks. ultimately,  that's a withdrawal. that implies  withdrawal of 50 million  $50 million from new york, from new york banks.  okay. so now they are way below their 25%  required reserves. so they have to replenish those reserves.  and how do they do that? calling in call loans to speculators.  [sound]  okay, young explains that the, the  new york banks, when they had  access reserves, that is to say, when the farmers didn't need them.  okay, they didn't want to just let them sit idle.  so they would lend them to stock brokers, who would use them  to as, to, to buy stocks, to make a speculation, and they would  promise to give this money back it was like overnight loans.  so they were, they are call loans.  they were, they were overnight loans.  and so come the harvest, they would say, okay, now i need the money back.  okay.  and as a consequence, the speculators would have  to sell whatever they had bought with that.  okay.  in order to come up with the money.  and so there was an asset price consequences.  if, if, it the speculators are selling, you see stock market stocks fall,  [sound],  and  interest rates rise.  [sound].  they also tried to raise reserves from world money markets, which mean london.  okay.  [sound]  which, which often disrupted  world gold markets  as as a matter of fact. so the united  states is this big child, okay, in the world monetary system, and every fall,  okay, it throws a little fit.  okay, and it causes, it causes the acid market to grow crazy.  it causes the international gold market to go crazy, okay..  eventually, europe got sick of this, okay, and  they sent us some help, paul wallberg, okay..  to help us create a central bank, okay.  but we did some of this on our own too,  there was agitation for a central bank, as, as well.  the key, the key moment was  1907, the financial crisis of 1907. when, jp  morgan sort of showed us, how we could get out of this crisis ourselves, okay.  by creating, amongst these new york banks, all of his friends.  they create, they had a clearing house, and they created  clearing house loan certificates, which were a substitute for money.  so they created elastic money supply, and elastic reserves,  but it was all private and for their friends okay.  what the fed did was to say, "hey; that's a good idea.  let's do that for everyone, and with a central bank.  now, i'm going to show you how that worked, okay.  
actually, i think an example's going to make this all a lot...a lot clearer.  so, let's just say that before class, i went to get  a cup of coffee at oren's daily roast, which i did.  this is late in the evening for me, okay?  and at oren's daily roast, a small cup of coffee costs $2  and i paid in cash. so this is a money, a money transaction.  how would we, characterize this in these balance sheets?  well, there's basically two participants to this thing.  there's me, and there's oren's daily roast.  [sound].  the company that was selling me the coffee.  and, it's pretty clear what happened, in terms of the coffee.  okay, that i made an expenditure on the coffee.  and that, oren's daily roast has a receipt on that.  [sound].  they sold the coffee. good or service, okay?  that was a source of funds.  and that i just told you, that this was all done with money, okay?  so that was dis-hoarding for me of $2. okay, and that $2 went right  in the cash register, and so, that was. hording, for  orin's daily roast.  okay, you can see here in work, i, i mean in practice, both of  those rules right the rule number one,  every, every use has a corresponding source.  okay?  rule number two, every use has a corresponding source on another agent.  okay?  so to describe, one simple transaction is always going to take at least  4 entries in order to explain this, it's just a consequence of these,  of these rules. here.  we're building intuition that's what this is about.  it's building intuition about the inside character of money.  about the inter, interlocking quality of the monetary system.  the money flow character of it.  these are not natural intuitions, particularly for economists, okay,  who've been trained to see money as a veil.  okay.  we're not seeing money as a veil, we're  seeing money as the entity we're focusing on.  we're going to be ignoring for most of this class stuff that's above the line.  and focusing on that's below the line.  here there's not much action below the line in  this simple money transaction, but watch the next one.  what's the next one?  the next one's a credit transaction.  okay, the credit transaction gets kind of interesting already.  okay?  so let's say that i, after class i go to varelli.  and i order their wonderful lamb burger. and,  some other things, and the bill comes to $20, and i charge it.  [sound].  i charge it.  [sound].  well, we're going to, let me erase all of this.  ' because now, we're going to need somebody else.  there's not just me and varelli. there's also the mastercard.  [sound].  i'll put mastercard in the middle.  ok, you, you see where this is going right.  i am doing what i did to begin with,  okay, and mastercard is being kind a like the bank.  they are the third party and support. here's me  [inaudible]  every though how exactly do credit cards work?  well, i am going to show you.  [cough]  and here's valeli.  okay.  the simplest part of whole thing is the dinner.  expenditure on dinner.  okay, and a receipt,  for dinner. but what  happened, at the end of that dinner. okay.  what happened at the end of that dinner was they brought  me a slip and i signed it, i just signed it.  what was i doing?  i was, i was not paying, i was borrowing. this is an iou, i'm promising to pay.  who am i promising to pay?  mastercard, exactly. i'm promising to pay mastercard.  okay.  so let's, so that's an iou, so that's borrowing.  so there's an iou here and that, that becomes a financial asset of mastercard.  i'm keeping these lined up in those rows there, okay?  so that's, my debt.  it's  [inaudible]  an additional debt for me.  it's additional financial asset for mastercard.  okay? but why did varelli say, okay, fine.  you're free to go now.  okay, they got something, they got something,  they didn't get it from me, okay.  they got it from mastercard.  they got a, iou, and i'll put mastercard  there, just to make clear that there  are two people borrowing here, okay.  [inaudible]  that that mastercard has an agreement, okay, with varelli.  that if i sign, if i sign, okay, mastercard will make good on this.  mastercard will pay for my dinner.  okay, but they're not paying for it right away necessarily.  okay, it's not, it's not necessarily, i mean there are some smart  cash registers where it immediately comes out of some bank account somewhere.  okay, but, they're not, they're not  paying it right away.  but they're paying it faster then i'm paying it, okay.  if i, i, i, i have a credit card that  i pay at the end of the month sometimes, okay?  but this, this merchant, wants their money, right, right away.  so perhaps next day, or, or at the end of the week or something.  so, so this is, this is, this is how the actual transaction.  works, first of all. this is how the dinner gets paid for.  everything else though, is below the line, and there's a lot below the line.  because there is a couple of iou's that have to be settled here.  notice how this payment happened by an expansion of credit.  okay?  an expansion of credit, in fact, two credits.  okay?  there's, there's a lot more credit in the  world now after this payment than there was before.  and, where did it come from?  came out of thin air, just me signing my name, that was it, expansion of credit.  so the first thing that happens to clear this credit, okay, is the next day or  something or the next week varelli and mastercard do business, okay.  and varelli says  i'm, i present  this. so let me just put.  i'll put a 2 next to that. this is stage 2 here, okay?  cashing in the iou.  and those things have entry points over here, right?  so that dishoarding have corresponding entries here.  i'll put a 2 there.  okay and and so and this is repayment here.  okay?  so now from verelli's point of view, all done.  it's as if i was paid in cash, right.  verelli says, that's all done. but it's not all done.  it's not all done.  there's another iou still there, okay? which is my iou.  it's not all done.  from my point of view, and from master,  mastercard's point of view, it's not all done.  there's more to go, okay?  and that happens at the end of the month, if, if,  presumably, i repay. and again, there is going to be.  mastercard is going to be hoarding.  they're going to be, in this there's going to be 3, decumulateing.  they're going to be decumulating a financial asset, this iou.g.  and, and, and using that, sale of that  financial asset to accumulate money balances here, okay.  and that is dishoarding here.  [sound].  and repayment here.  [sound].  these are simple examples, okay, of the payment mechanism.  here what happened, credit expanded and then, and then in, two credits at  once and then in two, in two different phases it collapsed back down.  and at the end of the day, there's no credit anymore.  at the end of the day cash was settling these used debts, cash moved, okay.  elasticity came from the credit.  discipline, these debts though, they got paid, that's the discipline.  so there's this balance, in  the system always, between the  discipline and the elasticity.  
[sound]  .  in a clearinghouse, the way clearinghouses work.  the new york, the new york city, what was it called?  new york, new york city clearing-, clearinghouse association.  [sound].  new york clearinghouse asso-, clearinghouse association, nyca.  has assets and liabilities.  everyone in my world always has assets and liabilities.  okay? it's set up, there are members, all the  big new york banks are members of the new york clearinghouse association.  okay, and it's a mutual organization.  there is, there is a first among equals, and  that's j.p. morgan, okay, we'll get to that, okay.  but he set this thing up, okay, and the other  new york banks are all members of this. and when they, they established this.  they established this in the discipline way, okay.  which is to say everyone deposits gold or  some other, or currency or some other reserve.  okay. so there's reserves there.  and then the clearing house issues clearing house certificates.  to the credit of bank a, bank b, whatever. okay.  okay, so these are actual, physical notes that  are representing the deposit of the bank in the.  in the clearinghouse, the deposit of these reserves.  so, they sort of stand for the gold.  they stand for the currency.  so you can see, this is a money system, right.  a discipline system right here, but during the day, it is not.  okay?  during the day, what these, all these people  agree, all of these big banks agree we are  going to treat every due from or due to,  to other members of the clearing house as something  that's due from or due to the clearing house itself.  okay, that sounds sort of complicated.  what i mean is this.  all i have to worry about, if i remember  this clearinghouse, if all b, c, d, if a, b,  c, and d are all members of the clearing  house, okay, i treat all of these things that i  have to pay to other banks as, as something  i have to pay to the clearing house and all  other things i'm being paid from other banks is  something that the clearing house has to pay to me.  so in other words you're summing all this stuff up,  you're summing it all up and there's a net to the clearing house.  or, or from the clearing house, whichever, whichever, whichever it is, you know,  whether the left hand side is greater than the right hand side okay.  and so already there's more netting.  you know, because it might be that you have a positive and a negative,  i, i mentioned this when i was  putting this up, positive, negative, positive, okay.  so the sum is going to be less than if you did it bilaterally.  with, with each bank. that's the point.  it's less than  if you did it bilaterally.  so during the day there's accumulated nets to the clearing house.  net due from a. net  due to b.  okay, these things are accumulated during the day and, and,  and physically this is what's so wonderful about the dumbar reading.  physically what this means is, these are actual checks, these  are actual orders of payments okay, and at the end of  the day the bank sort of add them all up  and then they go and then they have a little meeting.  at the clearing house and they say, okay i'm  actually a net, you know i'm a net positive person today, okay.  you know yesterday i was a net negative person and you're a net negative person.  so what i'd like you to do now is to give me a clearing house certificate, okay.  for, for that.  so let's just change, let's just exchange little green pieces  of paper and these, these liabilities of the clearing house.  i mean they could just be deposit accounts or something, but.  let's just exchange these, these things and  call it a day and go home and then come  back the next day at the, at, at the clearing.  okay.  so the point is that there's a credit expansion during the day that  creates elasticity and then there's a settlement at the end of the day.  elasticity, discipline.  credit expansion and settlement.  elasticity and discipline at the very highest level of the system.  these highest level of the system  people know that they have access to this and the people lower down don't.  so they are able to sell this elasticity.  in a way.  to, to, to, to allow the people who have deposits with them  to have elasticity in the system, because they have elasticity in the system.  and so force all the way down.  so that it, it, it, spreads. the whole system is elastic.  the whole system is able to operate as a credit system.  because the clearing house operates as  a credit system during the day, anyway.  sometimes there's three day settlement, two.  this is why this issue of how long  the floaters out there is kind of important, okay.  because it doesn't necessarily settle everyday, i was just making that as  a as a hypothetical. so there's credit expansion and then.  clearing, if, okay so, ao's  here.  suppose, but its a money system, okay, so  suppose a doesn't have any clearing house certificates, okay.  they've been having, they've been running deficits for a  couple of days, and they've run all the way down.  they don't have any more clearing house certificates.  now what? okay?  now what is, it becomes bilateral.  okay, a needs to borrow a clearing house certificate  from somebody, okay, and that would be jp morgan  who runs the clearing house, okay, for example.  okay, so there's a hierarchy there as well  that, that if you can't meet your clearing.  at the end, then you borrow from some member, and that  is one final net due okay, and so that helps to clear.  and, you know, who is positive member, you know, you see this.  so you know that you could easily borrow from b, because they have extra money.  come in from, so you could in fact borrow  from b if they're willing to lend to you.  and so it can be arranged between the bankers as an iou.  so that's one way to clear at the end of  the day if you don't have any money, banker's money.  but suppose no one will lend you  money because they think actually you're insolvent.  okay.  you're not just elliquid you're insolvent. okay?  in that case all of the, all of these payments  are mutual obligations of all the members of the clearing house.  that's how it's set up, it's a mutual system.  so that this gold here, okay, goes to satisfy all  the people who are owed money by the clearing house.  prorata, okay,  and so there will be losses, but they will be spread among all  of the members with this person taken out, okay and then they're gone.  you know, they're banished.  they no longer exist.  they're, they're not a part of this clearing system anymore.  it doesn't happen very often, but so there's another principle there.  that is important for banking and is used many times, which is that  the credit of the aggregate of a group of banks that jointly and  severally insure something is better than the credit of any individual bank.  okay, that is clearinghouse credit is better  than the credit of any of the bilateral.  people there, it's backed by everyone.  so this net from a, okay, so there's the first thing that could be done is  pay in clearinghouse certificates. okay.  or borrow from  another member.  okay, maybe from b, since they're a positive member.  okay.  or, default, be banished to the outer ring of  hell.  okay.  
what i want to distinguish right now is,  is the difference between brokers and  dealers, so okay. brokers.  in a way that's what i was showing, sort of here, back here.  i was showing that bank a and bank b were directly  interacting with each other.  they found each other, but somebody might have helped them  find each other, and that might have been a broker.  a broker, just like the broker for a house, okay.  when you buy a house, does a broker buy the  house from the seller and then sell it to you?  no they do not, they just put you together and they  let you do business and they take a fee for it.  that's what a broker is, okay.  so, there's maybe a broker doing this business between bank a and bank b,  because there's certainly no other bank that is, that is setting up this loan.  these loans exist on the balance sheet of b.  they exist on the balance sheet of a.  not on the balance sheet of some intermediary, like we have over here.  over here we have hsbc operating as a dealer, okay.  that the loans,  the fed fund's loans exist, this, here  and here, okay. chase and citibank may not even be aware,  probably are not even aware that they are lending and borrowing from each other.  they know about hsbc who's in the middle here,  okay, acting as the intermediary, acting as the dealer  to make, to make markets.  this is the source of liquidity in these markets and so it's kind of an  important thing for a money banking class and we'll be talking lots more about it.  [blank_audio]  
pulled up here the this is, this is a weekly statistical survey that the fed  has on its, the new york fed has on its balance sheet of all the primary dealers.  they ask them various questions about their balance sheets and,  and, and what they've done during, during the, the week.  so this, table one, says primary  dealer transactions in u.s. government agency mortgage  backed and corporate securities by type of security.  so, and who you, and you who traded with.  let's skip ahead.  here's, here's what you traded. you can see the different categories.  i'm, i'm going to make this a little larger when we come to the right one.  u.s. government securities. you can see coupon securities.  federal agency, that's, that's fanny may and freddy mack.  you see a mortgage backed securities, corporate securities.  so, these are the, these are the securities in  which they're trading.  you haven't seen the word repo yet have you, okay, these are security dealers.  okay.  now this one, i want to dwell on for a moment.  so this is table three, and let me just read this here.  what it's showing you here, is the net position of the, of the dealer.  okay, what is their inventory, and therefore, what is their risk  exposure in the, in, in the, in the market for the securities.  and you can see here that they're showing us government security's treasury bills.  there's about 20, looks like $26 billion worth of treasury bills there.  coupon security's do in three years or less there's 68, 68  billion and then there's negligible amounts of any longer term bonds there.  okay.  it's all short term stuff. this is very unusual.  okay? if yo looked at the, at these dealer's  balance sheets before the crisis, and in fact, before operation twist, that the  fed has been doing, typically the dealers have a short position in bills, okay?  that is to say they actually have negative position in bills.  they, they, they've sold more bills, to the market, than they actually own.  so, they have a, they have a short  position in bills, and a long position in bonds.  so, they're short bills, they're long bonds, they're, they're picking  up the term spread is what they're, is what they're  doing typically.  here you see they have no bonds at all and they're long bills.  what they're doing is taking the opposite side of what the fed is doing.  the fed has been dumping it's bills, getting rid of its bills and buying bonds.  okay?  and this has distorted the, the, the dealer's balance sheet.  this had lead some people to suppose, to  say well that explains why repo is distorted, okay?  it has something to do with the distortion of the dealer's balance  sheets and when it goes back to normal the repo rate will go back to normal.  it will go back down below fed funds.  there was an article published in reuters by some analyst at barclay's that.  that made exactly this argument, okay, it's  certainly true that dealer inventories are all out  of whack, that's certainly true that operation twist  is doing a big job on the dealers.  because the fed, when it wants to buy bonds, okay, who  does it buy them from, it buys them from the dealers,  that's what a dealers job is, they're making markets  in bonds, they're saying i'll buy these bonds at  this price, i'll sell these bonds at this price,  the fed says, okay, at that, i'm a buyer.  and so you suck all the bond inventory out of the dealers, okay.  that's the first thing that happens, okay.  and then the fed says, oh and by the way, i'm a seller of bills, so you shove  all those bills and you, you eliminate the short  position the dealers normally have and they go way long.  so the dealers are absorbing  this massive mismatch that the fed is imposing on the market and then  gradually they will distribute it, you know, they'll find some more bonds or  they will find some people who want bills, they'll distribute it among other  people but for the moment they're absorbing this on their own balance sheet.  that is certainly going to push around the price of bills,  it's certainly going to push around the price of bonds, okay.  that's the point, that's why the fed is doing it.  it wants to raise the price of bonds,  it wants to lower the long term interest rate.  it wants to push around those prices,  so it's definitely going to push around those prices.  but why should it push around the repo rate?  okay, that's what i wonder. okay?  but let's persue this one more. so this is table three that is showing you  the dealer's balance sheet in a way. you can see their exposures.  but these are net exposures. this is how  many outright positions you have.  by the way, it doesn't show you necessarily  even their risk exposure, because they could have  derivatives, they could have swaps, they could have  futures, they could be hedging, all, every which way.  okay, this is just showing you the  securities they have in their, in their inventories.  and its distorted, its not what they, what they used to have.  what this is showing you is the gross balance sheet, okay?  not the net, not how, not what your net exposure is, but what your gross exposure  is, meaning you can see there total 1.9  and those are in millions, so that's $2 trillion.  okay.  so there's $2 trillion worth of secure, worth of securities in, okay.  so these are, these are securities that the,  the dealer has brought on to its balance  sheet, okay.  and it has to finance them, by borrowing overnight or by borrowing term.  this is showing how they're financed.  this is the other side of the balance sheet.  securities out, securities that had sold.  okay.  so it's sort of short positions, and this is how it's financing those.  okay.  overnight or term.  what i, look, look at these numbers down here at the bottom.  memorandum, reverse repurchase  agreements, and repurchase agreements. okay?  reverse repurse agreements and, and repurse, repurse agreements.  let's make that into a balance sheet here.  okay?  so, reverse says it's on the asset side there.  and you have overnight.  of 878.  okay. and you have term  of, of 1316.  and on the other side, if you look at repo there.repurchase  agreements, you have overnight of one point i can't quite read that.  i wrote them a note.  1.842?  [sound]  and term. of 931.  [sound]  okay? so, this financing in  securities, okay, shows you the other side of, of the securities business.  alright?  they're buying and they're selling bonds.  okay but they are at the same time funding their longs, long positions in the, in  the repo market here and funding their short  positions in the reverse, in the reverse market here.  okay.  so they, they are like a bank and what are they like a bank?  you know i told you that this overnight repo the pension fund thinks of  that as like a deposit account even  better than a deposit account because it's secured.  okay and there is $1.8 trillion within this stuff.  $1.8 trillion for this stuff.  this is larger than anyone. okay.  this is a very big number okay in the economy and it is sort of institutional  investors are using this as their money supply here, wholesale money supply.  but notice, notice the what is going on here too.  the big number on this side is term. the big number on this side is overnight.  so what are these repo dealers doing? they're borrowing short and lending long.  just like a bank.  they're borrowing overnight and they're lending term.  now maybe term is a week okay.  instead of, instead of a day. okay.  but it's more than a, it's more than all right.  they, they definitely are operating like a bank, and  in doing so, they're supplying liquidity to the world.  okay.  and to the, to the wholesale money market world.  so the security dealers although they're focusing on  making money by trading securities in doing so  they create an enormous volume of monetary assets  eh, for, for the rest of the economy.  the total size of this by the way these numbers don't add up.  there's other, there's other things on here so net worth  there's other ways they finance themselves so it's not  all, it's not entirely a story of, of repo.  net assets financed is, is the balance item here.  but these are small numbers.  these are the big numbers, this is what  mostly the balance sheet, mostly the balance sheet is.  yes?  >> when, i, i think i saw this once.  like, when banks or, well, or just anyone just like rolling over.  people roll over their repos. >> mm.  >> in a general basis.  so, how, can you.  would it be possible to illustrate how like changing the haircut.  [cough]  >> cause this problem, like that can cause problems for them?  >> yes.  sure.  so here, this language, okay, rolling over repo okay.  so these loans are maybe overnight, maybe they're three days.  they're not very long.  okay so that if you want to continue doing this you  have to roll it over you have to renew this this instrument.  remember i started class the money goes one way over a night  then it comes back the next day but you can then  renew it and do it again but everything is up per  graphs all the prices are up for grabs, the hair cut,  the repo rate are up for grabs and they can change.  so if you are using repo to finance your holding of a security.  okay?  and overnight the haircut moves by, from 2%  to 10%, you find yourself with a funding gap.  okay?  yesterday, you were able to borrow 90, 99  you know $0.99 on the dollar with this security.  today, you can only borrow $ 0.90 on the dollar.  where are you going to find the other nine?  you know, if you were, if you were using this to finance  your holding in the security, where are you going to find the other nine.  and if you can't find the other nine, then you  can't hold the security, and you have to sell it  for whatever you can get for it, which, of course,  is a fire sale price, and it pushes the price down.  so there,  the, the movement of haircuts can, can, can very much faster.  spiral, liquidity spiral down and, and that was  part of the story in the, in the crisis  that there were these so called triple a  mortgage bank securities that had very tiny hair cuts.  and those haircuts moved from, from 2% to 10% to 50%.  and, and meanwhile so all this funding, scramble for funding was going on with big  liquidity, liquidity crunch that distorted every other price in, in, in the world.  
you could do all of this in a classic all banking is a swap of iou's okay, but  it takes up balance sheet space, you know, and  if your regulators are saying, well for the size  of your balance sheet you need to hold capital  and you need to hold reserves or something like  that, you don't want to do this in a  literal, on balance sheet swap of iou's way, okay?  so you could do it in a off balance sheet way and stigum talks about the evolution.  the first iteration  of this was something called a forward, forward.  okay?  where the banks prom-, basically just promise to make, this bank to make a  promise to make a deposit in bank x at rate f, two months from now.  okay?  that's a forward, forward. okay.  the next step is the forward rate agreement, which is  exactly what i told you, which is where the bank.  banks agree to exchange  the difference between libor and f%,  okay. in a, in a forward rate agreement, bank  y does not promise, to make a deposit, it just says okay.  you, you bank x go ahead and you fund that three month loan at three month libor.  okay.  and then we will act as if okay, there's a three month deposit  it pays f minus libor,  between you and me, f minus libor, and similar  here bank y has that deposit, f minus libor,  here.  so you can see that the forward rate agreement allows  bank x to say, i've locked in that rate of interest.  okay?  because i'm promising to pay bank y the difference here, and so i'm, if i  fund myself at libor i don't have to care. if libor goes up, okay?  if libor goes very  very far up, okay? then this is a negative number.  bank y pays me, okay? and if libor goes down, okay?  then, then i pay, then i pay, bank, bank, bank y.  so the forward rate agreement.  implements exactlly what this swap of values would do.  it makes it, it locks in funding  okay for future, for future point but it does so in a way that doesn't take up any  balance sheet space okay its a off balance sheet that looks like a side bet on live.  you know.  if libor is greater than f, you pay me.  if libor is less than f, i pay you. it's a side bet on libor.  but it's used to line up payments in time.  and it's used to make, to, to, to substitute for this unwieldy.  on balance sheet swap of ious.  as  far as i, all of the derivatives that we're  going to deal with in this course, that includes interest  rate swaps, that includes foreign exchange swaps, that includes credit  default swaps, they all can be viewed as implicit behind-the-scenes.  swap of iou's of one kind or another.  okay.  so they are completely integrated in to this  balance sheet structure that we're, we're having, and  that's how we will understand them and we  will understand their cash flows and, and so forth.  this is the first one you're seeing, the first one of  these examples, but you're going to see this kind of analysis again  and again where we're taking something that looks like, you know,  it's a derivative, it's a side bet, it's something like that.  and we're saying, well how would you structure this?  how, how could you structure a bet using a swamp of ious just on  a bank balance sheet that would give exactly the same payoff as this thing.  okay?  and once you do, then you, then you could figure  out, well maybe that's what people are using it for.  maybe that gives us an insight into what this instrument is for.  they're trying to do something to their balance sheet.  okay, and, and it's not really off balance sheet you know, there's and  implicit on balance sheet aspect of it that we, that's behind the scenes.  
this is the balance sheet of the bank of england in january 9th, 1924.  okay?  the bank of england is the central bank for bagehot's day.  and this isn't bagehot's day.  this is after it.  but in fact, this division of the, of the central bank into the issue department and  the banking department is what bagehot talks about when peel's act was, 1844.  that was peel's act. it separated  the bank of england into an issue department and a banking department.  the issue department, you can see, is the i-, is where the notes are.  okay.  so the central bank is issuing the bank notes, is  issuing the currency of the, of the, of the economy.  and mostly, it's issued against gold, gold coin and bullion, you can see there.  there's a little bit amount of government debt there,  [inaudible]  issue.  but mostly it's gold, mostly it's gold, okay.  the issue department is under quite strict regulations that it can only, on  margin, it can only issue more notes if it gets more gold and if  [unknown]  come to you with notes and they say i want gold you have to pay them.  okay?  so, that, that's the central bank's sort of the issue department.  that's why it's holding so much gold. okay?  because these notes have to be a redeemable  in gold when foreign central banks dema, demand it.  now look at the banking department, that what we going to  focus on now because it's not foreign exchange yet, okay.  the banking department is holding some of these notes as a reserve okay.  the rest of the notes are out in  circulation in other banks and in peoples pockets okay.  its also holding a government security in  other securities these other securities are things  like discounts, okay discounts to firms and  things like that, they are trade bills.  okay, and their liabilities are mostly deposits, you see there other deposits.  the bank of england was actually a bank, you could have  a deposit, firms could have deposits there okay, not like the fed.  you can't have a deposit, only banks can have deposits.  but in the bank of england day, days, firms,  and banks, and lots of people would have deposits there,  at the bank of england, okay.  so this is to remind you what the central bank looks like, that it's a bank.  and it's a bank that is involved in the same bill market, okay, that this bank is.  it's doing, when i say banking department, i mean a department that does this,  that does this stuff, here. unlike other banks,  and bagehot makes a big deal about that, they hold  quite a bit of notes there, quite a bit of notes.  i mean, is that a lot, is that not, not very much.  it's certainly not you know, gold and silver coin.  it's not way down to that. okay?  but they hold, they hold notes.  and they're in the discount business with the market,  and they're in the rediscount business with other banks.  okay.  the bank of england quotes what it calls the bank rate.  bank rate is the rate at which, if you are a banker, and you need, and  you need to acquire notes, you can go to the bank of england and acquire them.  so there's a rediscounted rate.  with other member banks.  but there's also the central banks which re discount rate.  which is published, it's official bank rate.  so another way of of getting notes, of dealing  with your cash flow problems, if you're a bank.  is borrowing at the central bank.  in these years, the bank of england is a private bank.  so called private bank.  it's private, privately owned.  and it's making money and it is, you  know, giving money to its shareholders and so forth.  but it is also holding the reserve essentially for  the entire banking system of, of, of great britain.  which is also at the time the reserve basically for the international  money market. okay?  so, it is the, it is the, it is the keeper of the, of the reserve  and it, it will in a, in it will pay out notes just like this.  okay?  it can also expand deposits just like this.  it can't print notes.  it can only print notes because if there's, if there is gold.  so, if the banking system as a whole, needs  needs liquidity, needs money,  it goes to the bank of england.  and it,  discounts  bills for  notes. or, in a real crisis  when the, when the bank of england runs out of notes, okay, it discounts  bills for deposits.  this is all very familiar.  the bank of england is doing the same thing, relating to the banking system,  as every individual bank does in managing its own cash flow, you know?  and, and you could, if you could describe  it, it could be a profit maximizing entity.  you could just say, i'm worried about my own cash flow,  and therefore i'm going to raise bank rate.  i'm worried about my own cash flow, therefore i'm going to lower bank rate.  you could do all of this.  but, what bagehot says is the bank of england, in fact, doesn't do this.  it acts because it is the lender of last  resort for the system, it's the keeper of the reserve.  in fact, the bank has public duties and it takes  on those public duties whether it admits it or not.  whether it's brought it up to  consciousness or not. and it, it bri-, it, it, it does that  by quoting bank rate, like this. it says, here's the  rate at which i will lend you money, all comers.  you know, if the rate, if the market rate gets to this level.  everyone goes to the bank of england.  as long as the market rate is below this level, nobody goes to the bank of england.  right?  you're trying to, you're trying to get your, you're  trying to get, get the best rate you can.  when you're, and, and, and, usually the  market rate of interest is below bank rate.  but, when everyone is scrambling for cash, that pushes market rates up.  and they scramble, and they scramble all the way  in to the bank of england right here, okay?  and then the bank of england  disgorges the notes that it's been holding and  it expands its own balance sheet, by expanding deposits.  and the member banks treat those deposits as if they were cash.  that's the key.  there's an economizing on notes so long as people are willing to  treat deposits at the bank of england as the same thing as notes.  they're not the same thing as notes. deposits are promises to pay notes.  notes are promises to pay gold.  
saying, how the fed, the fed could do this.  now we have to ask, should it do it?  why would it do it?  just as when we were thinking about private dealers, saying  they could absorb this fluctuation, why would they do it?  and our answer was what?  they make profit doing it or expect a profit doing it.  so, that's fine, but that's not the motivation for the fed.  i mean, it possibly could, if you wanted to, you could, you could,  make profit doing this. but it is trying to do what?  and how should it think about.  should we interviene, should we not intervene?  you know, when do we want to use.  our ability to take the pressure off the system  and when do we want to let the pressure ride.  okay, this is the question, the  balance between discipline and  elasticity, okay. elasticity, the fed can always.  provide elasticity if it wants to.  but that doesn't mean, necessarily that it should.  let's think about, first of all, what are the arguments in favor of elasticity.  one of the arguments in favor might  be that these prices are getting so distorted.  okay. that the, that the, that the pressure  is, the prices are getting so distorted that it's causing people to make bad  economic decisions, or maybe they're getting so  distorted that, that now they're not stabilizing anymore.  that, that as asset prices are falling, people who  have those assets are lo, are, are now not able  to use them as collateral anymore, and so they're dumping  them, and the whole thing becomes a liquidity downward spiral.  and the system is just collapsing, okay. so, that's an argument for  ease, okay, if you if you can stop a liquidity  spiral by doing this, that's, that might be a good thing.  or if you can stop people from making decisions on prices that are distorted  away from their fundamental's, that might be, that might be a good, a good reason.  yes? >> yes, so my question is  [inaudible]  so if these prices are falling, right, like why is the value based investor  [inaudible].  >> ok. yes.  so, this is the value based, so here these are the value based here.  and buyer and seller here.  and so that, that's the exact great question  because in a certain way, the fed, at least  here in this picture, in this picture it's, the  fed is not really acting as the value-based investor.  okay?  it is backstopping here.  it's backstopping banks, okay, it's not backstopping dealers,  that is why i said today we're doing  we're thinking about dealer of last resort in  the money market really not in the capital  market, okay.  so this is, maybe moving ahead, but you deserve an answer.  so the, the reason the fed might, might, intervene directly, even  in the asset market, which it did in this crisis, okay.  is because the value based investors didn't do it,  okay, they refused to do it, or they did  it, and they lost money and they lost their  shirts, and now there aren't anymore value based investors.  which is sort of what happened in this, in this crisis.  or the value-based investors are waiting too much.  they're waiting until prices are $.20 on the dollar and by that  time, you know, they're only going to get to $.20 on the dollar.  if we have a great depression, and we're not here  to try to make money for the value investors, okay.  we're trying to stabilize the economy, and we're  concerned about unemployment and that sort of thing.  so it's not, so there's a lot of answers,  okay.  but you are quite right that you need to have  in mind that there are other players in this story, okay.  that is not the case that the fed can just implement whatever it wants, okay.  it has to be paying attention to other  people and if the value based investors step in,  then maybe the fed doesn't have to do anything  you know and, and you don't have to intervene.  danger game.  so the logic i was exploring here, was why intervene.  and the way, the reason we intervene, is either because  you think acid prices are distorted in some way that's harmful.  or, that, not only are they distorted but they're getting more distorted, okay.  that they're, that we've, sort of, not, no longer is there any pressure to, the  pressure on the system is not moving  it back toward equilibrium, it's moving it away.  okay?  people are liquidating stuff, they're dumping stuff.  see, look.  what started this in the first place was people dumping securities, right?  and if a fall in prices causes you to have to sell securities.  the effect of that, is to load on even more trouble on the system.  and cause prices to fall even farther.  so this is the liquidities downward spiral,  okay, that central banks are concerned about.  okay, so, now let's ask the question the opposite way.  if the fed,  if it's so great, okay, to keep prices from moving away from their fundamentals.  why doesn't the fed always do this.  you know, why, why doesn't, why, why isn't it always elastic.  why does it want any discipline at all.  okay. and here i think, we come back.  to the reading we had by minski.  who talked about, what is it which causing money market rates to move away from  their equilibrium values.  it's some sort of mismatch between cash commitments and cash  flows that people make promises to deliver things in the future.  and then they find out that they can't do it.  you know, the world, they were too optimistic or or, whatever.  they made promises and they can't deliver and so  now they have a problem and they have to  to roll their commitments over to the future and  this shows up in pressure on the money market rate.  if you didn't let these rates move. okay.  what is the incentive for them not to continue  just pushing this off into the future and never paying?  okay.  this is the thing, that what, what, what  makes mistakes get recognized, okay, is discipline, okay?  that at some point.  you, you have to pay or go bankrupt, or just go away.  you know? so the discipling feature  is, for a market economy, okay, is kind of critical.  because otherwise the mistakes that people make just build up, build up, build up.  and if you don't ever clear the system out at any point, it's like you know, this  dry tinder in, in the, you know, smokey  the bear created much larger, larger forest fires, okay.  then, then, then the natural, the natural wood.  okay.  now that doesn't  mean to say that allowing all the fires to burn always is the right thing to do.  so that's what i say, that's what i said, this is the art of central banking.  central bankers feel this in their bones that it's not always the  right thing to do, to provide elasticity for every little market hiccup.  okay?  or maybe even market stress of, of significant amounts.  because during market stress, things happen.  people are forced to behave in ways they don't want to behave.  okay, they are, because they have to meet their settlement payment, you know.  so they, they have to liquidate, they have to sell stuff they don't  want to sell at prices that they would never ever accept in normal times.  they're forced to do stuff by the need to raise cash and that  means they're forced to recognize the mistakes that got them into this position.  and they start afresh from a new place.  okay. that's the idea of the discipline.  on the other hand, if the discipline's too bad, you're  killing the patient, and, and you don't want to do that.  okay.  so the, the, that's the art of central banking, trying to figure out, when  is enough, enough, and, and you can see the fed always thinking like this.  you know.  and even in this crisis. that we had.  they weren't immediately coming in and flooding.  they were saying, well, look. there's a lot of bad mortgages out there.  why don't we let some of that stuff just wash  [inaudible].  and we're going to support the system and keep it from collapsing, but there was  a, it was a bubble there, and, and let's just let it all wash out.  and let's just, let's just make sure that it doesn't get too bad.  but then it got worse than they thought it was  going to, and they said, okay we better hold it here.  but let's, let's just keep it, keep it, keep it afloat  and then it got even worse, so things they responded to circumstances.  in this, in this way but always  thinking about we need to keep the pressure on in some  sense in order to resolve this problem in a fundamental way.  on the other hand, we have to take the pressure  off, so that this thing doesn't become chaotic and disorderly.  okay.  so, that's that balance. that's that balance.  
[sound]  so we got the fed.  there were attempts, he tells us about them, attempts to create the fed  by the bankers themselves but they, of course, were not viewed as trustworthy.  ultimately it was president wilson who, who got it,  who got it through just in time for for world  war i to use it, for world war i finance, which i'm going to come to in a moment.  the history of american central banking is a history of war finance.  let  me show you what the idea was of the fed.  this was how, this is just turning into balance sheets,  okay, what it is that young is saying in words there.  so you can, you can connect these things back up.  he says there are, under the federal  reserve system, there are three sorts of levels.  okay, not dissimilar to, to this here.  okay, there are the member banks.  [noise]  there are the  reserve banks.  which are sprinkled around the country.  in fact, they're in exactly the same place as the, as  the, reserve banks were before in the, in the private sector.  so there's one in boston, in san francisco, and all those sorts of things.  and, then there's the federal reserve system.  and this is the, sort of central, central bank.  and the idea of the system was this. that any member bank, okay.  it, it's just a bank. it's making loans to its local customers.  farmers, merchants, people, main street. okay.  these are main street banks. so they're making loans, and they're  making loans by expanding their balance sheet, possibly, their own deposits, okay?  this is good.  this is what we want, supporting business, supporting main street.  we want these banks to be able to do this.  okay, what constrains these banks from doing this is a fear that if  these deposits are withdrawn, you won't  have sufficient reserves to make those payments.  okay.  we don't want these banks to worry about that, okay.  and how do we make, because then they make loans.  [inaudible]  . we want them to make these loans.  so we, we create this system of discounts  in order for them to replenish their reserves.  if they run out of reserves, they can  always get more from their local reserve bank.  and the way you do that, okay?  is by using these loans themselves.  as collaterals, as collateral for borrowing  from the federal reserve bank, okay.  this is called discount loan, okay? so you're borrowing.  you're borrowing from the federal, federal reserve system.  by using this loan as, as, as collateral, okay?  [sound]  .  [inaudible]  , or by even selling it to the.  if it's, if it's in a certain form, you could even  sell it to the federa-, to the, to the reserve bank.  and the reserve bank will give you reserves.  [sound]  .  [sound]  for  this.  okay. this is the alchemy of banking.  once again, notice the member bank is able to make loans.  good loans to customers with out fear of running out of reserves.  why?  because you can use those loans to borrow  from the reserve banks to get more reserves.  and why?  because the reserve banks can create reserves on their own balance sheet.  the are expanding their new balance sheets.  they're from thin air.  these are new reserves in the system. they weren't there before.  elastic reserves.  not like the national banking system. okay.  well, that's all very fine and good  if you're making a transfer to another bank, but  what if these deposits are withdrawn in, in notes?  okay.  what about that? have you thought about that?  yeah, they thought about that. and here's, here's how that works.  ok. these reserve banks have the right to  rediscount [chalk]  at the federal reserve  which prints money.  little green pieces of paper. this is how he's explaining it.  this is not exactly how it works today, okay.  so just be aware of that.  i'm just translating what he says into balance sheets so that you can.  under, understand it.  but the point is these things.  [sound]  these things are cash money. right.  these are deposits in a bank.  okay.  these things are cash money that can circulate.  okay. so cash also is elastic.  the supply of cash also is elastic and can expand and contract to meet demand.  that's the whole idea of the fed.  the whole idea the fed was founded on was the notion that were  living in this agricultural country where  the demand for, for money fluctuates seasonally.  so we need to have the supply of money fluctuating seasonally.  okay.  the demand for deposits fluctuates sea, seasonally, so we need  to have the supply of reserves back those deposits fluctuate seasonally.  and we created a system for that, that was based on the idea that banks would be  taking their loans to main street, and using them to acquire these reserves and  these notes. that was the idea.  if you read the federal reserve act, that what it says.  it says, we''re going to, the assets of the reserve banks are  supposed to be, these discounts, which are essentially loans to main street.  that's, that's how it was sold by president wilson.  okay?  [blank_audio]  .  
of the, a study of money flows in the united states.  so, this is, this is maurice copeland's book, 1952.  this is a published by the national bureau of economic research, in fact.  and he was proposing this set of accounts that  you're seeing right here as a framework for macroeconomic analysis.  what it is, it's based on this conceptional framework.  okay. uses and sources for each individual.  okay.  but of course, we don't have data for every single transaction for  every individual. okay.  so there's a lot of sort of aggregation and netting, and things like that.  and that's what makes it difficult for people to understand the flow of funds.  because they're, they don't have this back in their mind.  okay.  but this is exactly how it's structured there.  and you can see that it's the whole macroeconomy there.  okay.  so there's a column here, it's probably too  small print for you to, to read from there.  but the first column, i'll just  read it to you, households and non-profit organizations.  and there's two columns\: the left one is uses and the right one is sources.  okay?  so, what they're doing is thinking of all households, you know,  all, all households in the whole united states as one entity.  and they're looking down and they're saying, the first dah, dah, dah,  dah, 13 lines well the first 12 lines are sort of the above the line part.  it's the goods,  it's the goods and services part that we're talking about.  everything below that is the financial assets the, you can  see lines 14 to 22 is basically different kinds of money.  you have us official reserves, you have sdr's, you  have treasury currency, forigne deposits, you have stuff like that.  and then from 23 on down, these are forms of credit.  okay?  so, they do it in reverse order from, they put money on top and forms of credit,  credit below in, in, in, in here. and what you're seeing in, in, in,  uses, and they're aggregating, but aggregation will still preserve this rule.  okay? these rules still apply.  okay?  and what these rules mean, the consequence of these rules in the flow of funds  account is that the columns, the column sums  are supposed to some to the same number.  so for each column for each column  households, the left hand column. okay?  which is uses should sum to same number as the right hand column.  okay?  it's also sum it rule number two, says that wills should sum to okay, to zero.  and they don't.  you can see these statistical discrepancies here.  that just means that you don't really,  you haven't, your statistical net hasn't captured something.  |okay?  but you know where the mistake is, kind of.  because it, the rows  are supposed to sum, and the columns are supposed to sum.  so you kind of know where the, where the problem is.  so there's households, there's non-financial  businesses, there's state local governments.  there's federal government, there's domestic non-financial sectors,  domestic financial sectors, rest of the world.  okay?  this set of accounts okay, is the concrete instantiation of the point  of view that minsky was saying in that quote that i gave him.  right? it's treating every, every unit.  state and local government.  and households, businesses, bank. as if they're banks.  we're thinking about sources and uses of funds.  okay? for, for all of them.  and this is a a framework for thinking about the economy.  so there's netting, it's, it's a little.  when you look there, you see some of these.  some of these sources are negative.  that's like an odd sort of concept.  how can there be a negative, a negative source?  this puzzled me when i was trying to learn, learn this sort of thing.  it's, think about they're constructing it. okay?  they're constructing it by saying, borrowing is a source of funds.  okay?  if your total quantity of borrowing went down.  okay?  that's a negative source of funds, so that's repayment.  is basically what that is.  so, instead of doing it  as we're doing, where we have repayment as a use of funds,  [inaudible],  they, they, they're treating reduction and debt as,  as a, as a negative, as a negative source.  but that retains these rules.  okay?  just, then, the, they're, they're just moving it  to the other side of the balance sheet.  okay?  and similarly, for, for uses.  sometimes there are negative numbers in uses.  okay?  and that's, again, if there's a negative number in uses, it  means you have some financial asset that you've reduced your accumulation of.  okay? so it's decumulation.  so, if you have in mind these concepts, that  thi, this, that this is the underlying analytical framework.  the underlying conceptual framework.  apply that to this matrix and you can see it all.  often, when, when people are using these accounts,  they don't see it in a matrix like this.  you know, they'll just have one table that  tells you what's happening with open market paper.  okay?  and or, or, or what's happening with non-financial  business or something. but this is the whole set of accounts.  this is macro-economy. okay?  and what copeland had in mind.  what he proposed in, in this book right here, he said caines is wrong.  c plus i plus j equals y, is  not a good framework for thinking about the macroeconomy.  because it doesn't take into account personal sales  [unknown]  financial assets.  it doesn't take into account personal sales of secondary, of,  of goods that are usually, are already produced, like old houses.  you know, this is a very big market in the united states.  this is focusing new, on new production.  and that's all very fine and good.  but there's a lot happening in the economy  other than this, which you're basically just subtracting from.  and a lot of it is involving the monetary system and the financial system.  and you're just treating,  you're just subtracting from all, all of this.  its not, it's not good enough for understanding the economy.  similarly, he said umonetrous mv equals pt.  okay. you're focusing on this m thing here.  okay?  and, and treating all transactions as if they're made with money.  it's like owen's daily roast.  the whole economy is like owen's daily roast.  no, most of the economy is credit transactions.  okay?  most of the economy is varelly like transactions, and  you're just absorbing that into this v number here.  just treating it as if money was just spinning around faster and faster.  these aren't good enough accounting structures for  understanding the modern monetary economy, said morris copeland.  i think he was right actually, but he didn't win.  [laugh]  and so this became, this was the, these sets counts were collected by a little  division of the fed up on the fifth floor in the back of the border governors.  people were like an arcane set of accounts.  for years and years and years, they collected them  and kept, kept pouring over them and so forth.  but it was not used for, for economic policy,  because there was no macroeconomic theory that hung onto it.  right?  the keynesians grabbed onto this and had a whole macroeconomic theory.  okay? about how spending causes income.  okay?  the monetarists hung onto this and they had a whole macroeconomic theory.  but there was never a macroeconomic theory for, for this.  so, there's a nobel prize for you.  okay? i think there will be.  there will be a macroeconomic theory for this.  but not for flow funds as currently, as currently, it, it is, it is used.  because, look at these statistical discrepancies.  these are large numbers.  okay?  look on the, look on the, the, the last column here.  the largest number there is 115 billion dollars, the statistical discrepancy  for the line 22, which is fed funds and security rps.  that's the wholesale money market.  okay?  what this tells you is that the action in the wholesale money market is  not being caught in the statistical net of the of the federal reserve system.  it's not being caught. we, we know approximately  the size of the error, 115 billion, but we don't know exactly where it is.  we don't know where it is.  there's a lot of stuff happening that we  don't know about, and we're trying to make policy.  we're trying to make decisions, and a lot of stuff is happening.  like only the fed funds, only this fed funds, sorry,  only the flow of funds even tells you this much.  okay?  [unknown]  accounts, mv equals ptt doesn't even tell you this much.  okay?  but fed funds is antiquated.  okay?  it's a place to start, but it's not a place to finish.  similarly, look at the sector discrepancies.  these are big numbers.  household and non-profit organizations, that's  a 561 billion dollar discrepancy there.  okay?  where, and, and, and, similarly, large numbers here.  domestic non-financial sectors, $440 billion.  a lot of this is because non-financial  businesses are financial businesses.  these, these, the categories that we're, we're, we're drive,  we've divided things into, we're imagining that gm makes cars.  you know, gm makes cars, sure. okay?  but they are really a financial institution, they're sort of a bank.  they have got international operations.  and the same is true with, with a, with non, non-profit organizations.  the world has changed  out from under morris copeland, 1952. okay?  and so, the office of financial research which is a division of  the fed, has been established after  this crisis to create new accounting structures.  basically, everyone realizes that our accounting is, is in bad shape.  the accounting, corporate accounting for individual corporate accounts.  but i also want to say our  macroeconomic accounting doesn't, isn't designed to capture  the kinds of things we, that are happening in, in the economy today.  one thing you notice there, where's all the derivatives?  you know, where, where, where's the swaps, where's the options?  you know, it's not, there were no such things  at the, in 1952, and so they're not there.  they're all off balance sheet items, all these  exposures, that's why you got all these errors.  you know, that there is a lot  of stuff happening in the economy that's not  being caught even in this set of accounts.  okay?  a lot of what i'm going to do in this cla, in this class, you'll see, is  to soup up these accounts so that we  can include swaps and derivatives, and so forth.  it's not so hard to do. and so i made a proposal to the ofr.  , maybe they'll accept it.  that this is the direction that, that we should be going.  there is a lot more detail, because i'm not an actual accountant.  i'm, i'm, i'm an economist.  
at times of stress, all of these banks are  having to make payments to, their, their, their correspondents.  okay?  or abroad. or something.  they all need to make payments, in gold.  they all would like to withdraw their, their account at, at the clearinghouse.  they're all under stress.  they may transfer these clearing house  certificates to their members, but then they  could run out of clearing house  certificates and they still can't make payments.  so, this is a problem.  even for the biggest banks in times of financial stress.  because remember, remember those numbers we saw.  all of these banks in the hinterlands are  holding their reserves in the new york city banks.  and the new york city banks do not have enough gold to cover this.  so, in times of stress they're in trouble.  the clearinghouse in times of stress creates money.  and it creates money by, not this bilateral borrowing from members, okay,  but by joint borrowing and lending, in this way.  okay. so in a real crisis, so here's a  [inaudible]  or. borrow from the central clearing house.  borrow from the clearing house itself and how would that work.  loan to a and i'm going to put.  6% interest there and what does the clearing house do, how does  it make this loan, it makes this loan by printing up another little piece of paper.  okay, which is a clearing house  loan certificate  bearing interest of 6%. okay.  which is guaranteed by the clearinghouse, not by a.  so this is a liability of the clearinghouse.  a, the clearinghouse is trying to get, will try to get  all kinds of collateral from a to make sure that they repay.  they're going to say, well, i know you don't have  any gold, but surely you have a first born child.  you know, or something else that you can pledge here that,  that you really are going to want to repay this  loan because otherwise i get, i get to keep this.  so they might have some securities of  some kind, government securities something like that.  so there'll be some, there'll, there'll be some security behind this loan deal.  look at what's happening here, we've created money.  ok, we've expanded the balance sheets on both sides.  at the very center of the system, the very top  of the system, not center of the system, very hierarchical  apex of the system.  we've created more of the best money in the system.  okay.  a debt, a debt on the new york city clearing house, okay.  which you can transfer to other banks that are looking for, looking to be paid and  these, these clearing house loan certificates begin to  circulate among banks as if they were gold.  right.  the clearinghouse certificates  are gold, you know, they represent gold.  there's gold in the clearinghouse for each one of these.  there is not gold in the clearinghouse for  each one of these, these are clearinghouse loan certificates.  and it will say on them, clearing house loan certificate, okay?  but it looks an awful lot like this, okay? and it is treated exactly the same.  it's treated by the banks as if it, because  it's just a, it's really a, both of these are  liabilities of the central bank, of the, here, i'm already slipping.  of the clearing house.  there is no central bank. the clearing house.  so this is during times of crisis. this is an expansion of the money supply.  this is a kind of lender of last resort operation  that's, that's going on here that is managed by this clearinghouse.  this is what we had in the united states  before we had central banking, and we still have it.  the new york city clearing house still exists,  it still does separate clearing with its members.  okay.  the members and a lot, a lot of the clearing of the  [unknown]  market abroad, okay, happens in this, in this, in  this setting, it's, it still exists, this, this clearing house.  but we also have a central bank.  there was a hand up there. >>  [inaudible]  >> well this is, this is you know this is a mutual thing.  so it is agreed there is a committee that  will be meeting to make this, this decision, okay?  and 6% at the, at 1907 is a very high number.  so this is like, you know, the badget rule.  lend freely at a high rate against good security.  okay?  so this is meant to be a rate this is pretty  pretty h, high, so that a bank that's borrowing at that  rate has an incentive to pay that back.  they don't really, they don't really want to.  they actually had problems, no-, now that you mention this.  there were problems because it was such a high rate.  people who got clearinghouse loan certificates,  kind of liked to hold onto them often.  you know it was like a nice yielding asset.  you know, it was the safest asset in the system.  it's a liability of the clearinghouse and it pays 6%.  what could be wrong with that.  and so, sometimes when the crisis was over they had a hard  time getting these things. back.  they didn't want to be repaid. okay.  and, and even though a, we paid, it was hard  for the clearing house to, to get, to get this back.  they managed.  you know, they're powerful.  so they managed to do this. but it's meant to be a high rate.  okay.  and it's meant to be good, good  collateral, good security that bankers all know.  the bankers know each other. they know what they would.  view as good collatoral themselves and  they're not going to take garbage, they're not going to take garbage.  in that sense it's not the same as a, as, as the fed okay?  which can decide you know, you don't have any thing better than that?  alright.  you know, i'll, i'll let it pass. okay?  typically if you didn't have acceptable credit,  acceptable collateral for the clearing house what you  had to do was find somebody who would  lend you some acceptable collateral and then you  would, you would borrow from the clearing house.  so there's, there's a bilateral feature to it.  and then there's an mutual feature to it.  this is all sort of arcane, okay?  but you can see how you can start to build  in your mind a picture of the, of the network  character in this, the hierarchical character of  the network, the credit character of what's  going on here, the discipline character, the ability of the people at the top.  to make decisions just because we know each other and trust  each other they have large consequences for the system as a  whole, positive or negative, young mentions in his, in his beautiful  chapter that in times of crisis they would refuse to pay.  these new york banks would actually refuse to  pay deposits of, of banks in the hinterland.  they wouldn't send them reserves or they would  send them, offer clearing house loan certificates to the  [inaudible]  to say take it or leave it.  you know we're not going to pay you bold at all.  okay.  we just refuse, we just refuse and they're able to  do that they save their gold for paying their, their, paying,  you know, abroad, you know, their, the bank of england or  somebody, somebody who, you can't just say, take one of these.  the bank of england would say, no.  [laugh]  we're not a member of your clearing house. no way.  we're not going to take one of these.  we're the bank of england, so, they'll demand  payment in, in proper international, in proper international money.  there, it was never clear that this was legal,  because this is money, right, and there are laws about money.  that it, it re, remember i mentioned before  about the national banking system that there were  these special class of, of government bonds that  2% bond that you could issue currency against.  okay.  that's not what's going on here. that's not what's going on here.  they're issuing these things against loans from their members.  okay? and it's being used as if it were money.  so there was always a kind of quasi, you  know, the bankers did this behind closed doors and  as long as they did it with each other  and these sort of never showed up in circulation.  you wouldn't, sort of, they got away with it.  okay, but sometimes they would show up in circulation, okay.  and so there was an issue about this.  are they breaking the law?  but it seems like, and they're doing this  for their members, not for the general public.  it seems like they're playing favorites, okay.  so there was a big issue.  one consequence of the crisis of 1907, okay.  was they passed a law to say it's legal to do this.  it's legal to do this.  this is okay.  and there was a, and there was actually some specific characterization in  that law of what kind of collateral is acceptable and, and so forth.  i don't remember off hand exactly what it  was, but there was, there was an act passed.  some people say.  still to this day.  okay, that's all that should have been done.  we never should have had a central bank.  all we needed to do was bless this and call it a day.  and we don't need central banks.  there are, there are definitely people who believe that and write books about that.  and it is a, there's a certain. a,  a certain truth to that, okay?  now once you understand what they're doing, you could say, well what they were  doing is lender of last resort, sort of in a decentralized kind of way.  and it, it worked so let's legalize it.  and then when the crisis is over, you know, you just pay these all  back and you shrink back and you have a, you have a disciplined system again.  so, you have a discipline system in the good times, and then when in crisis you,  [sound]  you, you. so it did work.  ultimately the, the pressure to get a central bank, came from the fact  that the new york bankers were, were, were playing favorites okay, with each other.  and, it seemed like this should be put under some democratic control.  the banks in the hinterlands who were being not paid  during this time when everybody needed to be paid, okay.  and maybe they defaulted, maybe they went bankrupt, and  all of this because of that, to save the  new york banks. they put pressure to change the system.  and that's how we got the fed.  and the fed.  one way to understand the fed is that it is basically a clearinghouse.  
expansion. i talked about daily g/ overdrafts.  the expansion of the balance sheet of chips, the expansion of the balance  sheet of the fed, in order to make payments possible during the day.  and then there's this discipline function, okay, at the end.  where both of them are trying to shrink their balance sheets back down, okay.  and the feds funds market is one way they achieve that.  but credit doesn't shrink right, it just moves off balance sheet of chips.  it moves off the balance sheet of the fed.  it moves onto the balance sheet  of the individual bilateral borrowers and lenders.  here. okay?  overnight, so it's the bilateral, a bilateral exposure, and it  moves onto the balance sheet of the fed fund's dealers.  okay.  so there's this expansion of credit during the day.  and then the center of the system, you know, the fed and chips  are protecting themselves by saying, we're not  going to extend these overnight, you do it.  okay, you do it on your own balance sheets.  and these are the balance sheets that take it, okay?  it's the customer's balance sheets or the bank,  the bank's and the fed funds dealer balance sheets.  so if there's some difficulty with the clearing  you know, if there's imbalances, if there's payment imbalances in the system  you're going to see them as an expansion of fed funds, credit okay?  and expansion of the dealer balance sheets here.  so these are symptoms of, of daily imbalances that couldn't be cleared.  that couldn't be cleared, had to be pushed into the future, with  the hope that maybe tomorrow the imbalance will flow the other way.  and if it flows the other way, everything can all be cancelled.  but if it goes on for two or three  days, maybe it gets bigger and bigger and bigger.  and so people are watching these balances.  these balances are, are highly sensitive measures.  of the, of the, of the payment patterns in the economy.  you can see the quantities and you can also see the prices.  because these prices are made in, in active markets.  they're bidding, the, the dealers are watching their balance sheet.  and they're seeing you know, oh, there's many  more people borrowing from me than lending to  me, i'm, i don't want to have that exposure, okay, so i better move my price.  okay?  if i want more people to lend, lend to  me i'd better, i'd better, better move that price.  if i want, if i want more people to lend to me i have to pay them more.  so i have to move the fed funds rate up.  and if the imbalances of the direction move the fed funds rate  down, okay, so the fed funds rate is a market rate in that  regard, and we saw. this is not fluctuation in today, okay?  in today, this is fluctuation over, over business cycle.  but during the day, it fluctuates too. and stigum talks about some of that in,  in, in the book, it fluctuates during the day.  so, where does the fed come in here? okay.  because we think of and we're used to from our.  intermediate macro class, or something, saying, oh  the fed sets the fed funds rate.  how does that connect up here, okay?  well, the fed, ha, it does not set the fed fund rate in that sense.  the kind of models you have seen in that regard are not actually true.  the  fed is not actually a participant in the feds fund market.  it's not borrowing.  it's not lending.  it's not doing either, either of these things.  that's not what, so how can it be setting the fed funds rate.  it has a target for the fed funds rate. how does it influence it?  okay.  it influences it by manipulating the quantity of reserves.  in the economy as a,  as a whole by entering in other markets in particular in the repo market.  so we'll see about that a little bit, a little bit tomorrow.  but almost everyday stigum makes a very good point here.  now you're used to in your intermediate macro textbooks  what does the fed do, oh it makes monetary policy.  and how does it do that?  it buys and sells treasury bills in order to expand the  money supply or something shift the lm curve you're used to that.  okay. here  i'm talking abut the fed going in every  single day, pretty much every single day trying  to anticipate where they going to be imbalances okay  and if there any imbalances in payment flows.  that are causing the fed funds, fed funds market to expand that's  going to drive up interest rates and i'm going to miss my interest rate target.  ok.  if there are imbalances that are causing in the other direction,  that's going to drive and i'm going to miss my interest rate target.  ok?  so i  go in.  i'm the fed, and i try to change  the underlying quantity of reserves that people are borrowing  and selling as a way of trying to  influence the need for buy-, for this credit expansion.  so i change money.  in order to influence credit. how do i do that?  the fed wants to change the quantity of reserves out there in order to indirectly  influence the fed funds rate. okay?  how does it do it? it does it by making over night loans.  [sound]  and i'm going to call it a repurchase agreement loan.  overnight repurchase agreement loan that creates additional  reserves, okay. and whatever you're counter-parting for  that is borrowing from the fed and getting additional reserves.  okay?  and these reserves if they want to they can lend in the fed funds market.  so you see creating additional reserves if this makes this agent in  fact we'll call this a security dealer because that's what it is actually.  and we'll, this is just anticipating what we're going to do next time, okay.  that, here's a security dealer that is  funding his security positions by using by using  them as collateral for borrowing from the fed.  all of these words will mean something next time.  but winds up with reserves which he doesn't want to have.  and so can lend on into the feds funds market.  okay and that can change, that can make more funds available and put down  more pressure on the daily rate, the fluctuation of the rate during the day.  fed funds effective, this number  here, okay is the average of the fed funds  rate during the day during the day, this rate, fluctuates.  also not everyone is charged the same rate, some people are bad borrowers,  they pay more, okay, some people are good borrowers, they pay less, okay.  so the, this is just an average of  the rate that everyone is paying in the market.  
that's sort of astonishing. it's supposed to be astonishing.  it's astonishing to me.  to, as, when i started teaching money and banking.  to appreciate, there's this enormous thing going on there.  and, most money and banking textbooks, don't mention repo.  they don't mention it at all.  they're focused on the retail money market.  they're focused on household making deposits or something like that.  they're focused on what banks do. and because  this is a security dealer you say, well that's not part of our subject.  okay.  this is where modern finance has just changed the world.  okay.  the fact that it's not called a bank  doesn't mean it's not operating like a bank.  if it is, if it is producing liquid liabilities, this is, this  is money supply for somebody in the in the in the economy.  by the way this not necessarily a pension fund  here this could be a money market mutual fund.  a money  market mutual fund that holds repo as its assets and issues  deposits to, foreign central banks or something like that, so yes  this stuff is money if not directly from, from a sophisticated  corporation, then indirectly passing it through a money market mutual fund first.  i said last time that in your intermediate macro text  book, okay, it it spoke of open market operations as  being the fed going and buying treasury securities or  selling treasury securities in order to change the money supply.  okay?  what really is going on here, okay, is the fed  is, is, is, is buying and selling to the dealers.  it's the dealers who make these markets in securities.  okay?  so, it's not like going to some business or some  household or some pension fund and buying a treasury bill.  maybe eventually it comes from there but the immediate thing that happens  is that the fed asks these dealers, these primary dealers, to bid.  it says  bid, bid, bid for this, bid for this i want to sell you.  okay, and i want to, i want to show you this.  so here for example are the temper open market operations.  here are the last 25 interventions in the, the market that the fed did.  this is on the balance sheet of, of the this  is on the web page of the new york fed.  [cough]  in normal times, before the crisis, the fed is in  trading in the reaper market every day pretty much, okay?  not any more because there's all these excess,  there's all these excess funds out there, okay?  but it is still occasionally trading and you can see, and that's  what i'm going to try to show you here what those trades look like.  here's my laser pointer. so here, here is the most recent one.  okay?  this is actually a reverse repo. here.  you can see there.  this is the fed going and saying to the  dealers i would like to borrow money from you.  i would like to offer security to you.  i would like to offer you. treasuries, agencies, mortgage backs.  okay? and i would like you to lend me money.  okay?  and you tell me what price you're going to give me.  you tell me your, your, your what you're offering and i will  tell you who i want to do business with and how much.  okay? that's what these things are.  so, these are the bids that are submitted by the  dealers and you can see the amount of them, 4.3 billion.  this is the amount of business that the fed actually did,  2.25 billion there. the stop out this is the minimum, minimum  yield that they accepted. there's an average of the different bids.  high and the low o, of the bids there.  so, they're doing business with the dealers  and you can see this quite literally.  they're, they're reporting this on, on the balance sheet here.  that's a reverse.  so when they, when, when this all, you see what it says there.  it says  it's a reverse. there, it is, the deal date is this.  delivery date is thursday the 13th.  the maturity date is monday the 17th.  so this is a several day, several day reverse, reverse repo.  and they have a little footnote there, it's part of an operational  [unknown]  program, okay?  so they're practicing, that's what they're doing here.  they, they are hoping that maybe they're going to  be able to use this mechanism to shrink their  balance sheet or to, to get rid of all  of these excess reserves, because that's what this does.  you say to, you say to the dealers i want you to lend me money, okay.  that, what that winds up doing is, is substituting on the feds balance sheet.  shrinking the feds balance sheet from  from well i'll show you that when we get to the other side.  so this is weird.  that the fed is doing these reverse, reverse repos now.  well, having written reverse repos there.  but because for a long time, and you'll see this in stigum the fed  refused to do this, or when it did reverse repos, it wouldn't call them that.  because, it would call them match sale purchases, msps.  and and  it's because it didn't want to be.  seen as somebody who needed to provide collateral  in order to borrow it in the money market.  so like on the fed, i print this stuff. why do i need to provide collateral?  i'm not, i'm not going to be treaty,  treating myself as if i were some security dealer.  now they're calling them reverses and they're, they're,  they seem to be willing to do them.  and so  the fed is just acting like a bank, of doing reverses, reverses here.  the, what we saw there we were, we were,  we were looking at the prices they were charging, this  definitely go back to august to get an actual repo  that they've done because repos add reserves to the system.  ok.  reverses, poll reserve, poll reserves out.  and they haven't needed to add because there's  a trillion dollars worth of excess reserves here.  and so you can see it's the same, the same situation here.  there's the deal date.  this is when they, the deflivery sate, so it's seven again.  they're going from tuesday to a friday during the week there so it's three days.  and again there's different collateral there's,there's  these are the, these are the bids.  they seem to have accepted all of them and these are the stop out rates  so its the same but they on opposite side of the transaction.  the fed is doing repo.  okay. what it does is,  make a repo loan here. okay?  and it increases reserves here.  so that's an expansion of the feds, the feds balance sheet in this way.  i showed you this last time.  now, i'm going to expand on it a bit more.  okay.  the fed is immediately doing business with a dealer.  [sound]  and that's all i showed you last time. now i'm going to show you one more level.  okay, which is the dealer has a bank.  okay. what happens here is that the the  dealer is borrowing money, the dealer doesn't have an  account at the fed, so the dealer isn't, can't hold reserves  directly, what the dealer does when, when he he, is paid  is to, is to increase his  deposit account at the bank. okay.  so now you see how that all adds up.  okay.  these reserves here in the banking system all come  from the fed doing repo with the dealer.  the fed is doing repo with the dealer,  lending the, lending the repo, lending the dealer  money, and and the dealer is providing security,  a treasure bill or one of these other things.  okay.  and those reserves wind up.  in the bank because the dealer deposits them.  now may be that the dealer is borrowing from  the bank and just repays some of that loan that  also, that also could work to increase the reserves.  either way the reserves wind up in the, on the balance sheet of the bank.  and if those are excess reserves, maybe the bank takes  those to the fed funds market and lends them or something.  so this is the notion of influencing the fen -- fed funds  rate by these open-market  operations here.  
bank y would like f to be a large number, because it's an asset, okay.  bank x would like f to be a  small number, okay, because they're borrowing at that rate.  so you might think they're negotiating it, or something like that.  but actually not, okay.  there's an arbitrage condition called forward interest parity.  [sound]  okay.  i talked about two, two different terms of deposit here.  one is a deposit for two months and one is a deposit for five months.  there are market rates for these things. actual market rates.  if you go, if you go into the euro dollar  market there's going to be an interest rate for, for five months.  there's going to be an interest rate for two months.  okay  let's use the notation r zero two for the two month  rate okay, so it's the interest rate from time zero  to time two. okay, and let's use the notation 1 plus  r 0 5 for the five month  interest rate.  now there is exactly one  rate of interest.  and i'll call it f, two, five that satisfies this equation.  and what i want to argue is that that's  the rate that will be chosen for this contract.  because any other rate is going, going to, you can manufacture that forward rate.  you can manufacture that forward rate by going short  [noise],  short and long. one or the other.  you know, i put f on these. but if these were real deposits.  okay.  this one would actually be a deposit at the rate 1 plus r 02.  and if these were real deposits this would be at the rate 1 plus r 05.  okay.  so, this person has manufactured for himself.  a, a funding rate, okay.  and that funding rate, okay, is f.  this person has manufactured for themselves, if  they use the real rates, the market rates.  an investment rate, and that is that, okay.  so the only rate they can really come to  an agreement on because these two things are market rates.  is, is this. this is the forward rate.  this condition is called forward interest parity.  and so fra, okay, is going to use that f in that, in that contract.  
this innovation of bank rate, means, that  whether is knows it or not, the bank of england is engaged in monetary policy.  this is the origin of monetary policy.  the bank that is thinking about the, sort of state of the market as a whole.  wh , a, a sort of real, sort of  minimal degree of that, of that responsibility is to  say, i will set the rate, and then when  the crisis comes, i will act sort of passively.  i'll set, i'll set a maximum rate, and then when crisis comes, everyone will  come to me, and i will lend to them freely at this high rate.  this is the badgett rule.  this is what bagehot said, you should do in a crisis, lend freely okay, at a high  rate, against good security. that's the bagehot rule.  and that's all he says actually, in lombard street.  he doesn't say, move bank rate around to try to influence the economy.  that all came later.  when people realize that, that, that the market is watching bank rate  and they know that the bank, that the bank of england is waiting in the wings, okay?  and that if things get bad enough the bank, you know market rate  gets up there, the bank of england will come in and, and will,  will discount for you. okay.  and because they know the bank of england  is in the wings, they're behaving in certain ways.  they're, they're, they're willing to take more risks or they're willing to lend.  because they know the bank of england, is there as the backstop.  but this gives the bank of england, an influence over the economy.  and once they realized this, they can move bankrate.  they can move it up and down.  they can't, down't have to just leave it at 6 % or something.  to move it up and down, and start to try to influence the economy.  you want to try to encourage credit growth, lower bankrate.  you want to try to discourage it, say i'm not going to help you,  your on your own, raise bank rate you know.  so that's the art of central banking.  the art of central banking is about a manipulation of bank rate.  if i wanted to bring this hierarchy background up back again.  because, i want to show you here.  here's the central bank.  partly the central bank, so the central bank is thinking it's, it's sitting on  top of the hierarchy from the point of view of the banking system here.  ok.  and it can think of itself as managing that hierarchy, ok?  as moving the, moving bank rate up, and  down and trying to influence things below it.  it can think of itself as being lender of  last resort in the case, in case of trouble.  and that's what bagehot emphasizes. lend freely at a high rate in a crisis.  the high rate, this is interesting, this, this, even this phraseology.  lend freely at a high rate.  this is elasticity and discipline, both, right?  lend freely, but at a high rate. why?  because he says, at a high rate, only the people  who really need it are going to come to you.  ok, and not somebody who's just  looking for cheap money. ok.  and not only that, they're going to pay it back fast too.  because once the market rate falls, they're going to re,  they're going to borrow in the market and pay you back.  because they don't want to be paying this high rate.  so it's self-liquidating in, in that way. discipline.  but lend freely, because otherwise if they can't make their payments, they default.  liquidity kills you quick. so the bank of  england, in looking down, ok, can you know, it  can use its own balance sheet to push interest  rates around ok, but only if it's willing to  let the market move on to its balance sheets.  so you've gotta be a little careful about that.  but it, it can relax tension in the market.  it can cause tension in the market, by  moving its own discount rate around, by refusing  to discount, or raising its rate when  everyone wants it, and saying, your problem, guys.  you've gotta settle it.  ok?  or by, or by saying this, this is now  a threat to the system, i'm going to settle it.  you come, you come to me and i'll give you notes.  
i showed you at the beginning of this lecture  that long list of different kinds of lending facilities, okay?  and here they all are, here they all are, okay?  as because this is the asset side of the balance sheet of the fed,  so all of these things are loans, these are loans that the fed is making.  and here's how it's financing these loans.  by expanding the liability side, by expanding, by expanding it's deposits.  i remind you that this is bear stearns, this vertical line here and this is  [unknown]  here.  and you can see the stages of the crisis, okay?  before bear stearns, if you look at what the  fed was doing, it was just moving the fed foundry.  in the months since oct, in, in since august, it  moved the fed funds rate from 5% down to 2%, okay?  so the first thing it tried to do was it, it responded with elasticity, right?  it's lowering, it's lowering the fed funds rate, it's trying to,  to make it more make it more profitable for, for banks  to take on the equity risk and, and, and so forth.  it's trying to support asset prices indirectly  by lowering, by lowering the fed funds rate.  but then bear stearns failed, okay? and that wasn't enough anymore.  and so then they got a little more aggressive.  they sold off these treasury bills.  this is about a trillion dollars of the treasury bills.  they sold of 500  billion of them.  and lent the proceeds to brokers, dealers and,  and, and everyone else who was in need.  and that was the second attempt, okay?  and then came lieman aig and things got worse, worse still.  and they took the, the money market unto their own balance sheet, okay?  they created their own, you know, two trillion  more of, of deposit fed and two trillion more  of lending on, on, on the fed.  the inter bank market broke down and the fed became the inter bank market, okay.  if you, you, you didn't, nobody trusted each other, they all trusted the fed.  so any new money that was flowing was flowing through the fed.  you deposited surplus, surplus entities deposited at the  fed and deficit entities borrowed from the fed.  this aqua thing is is mortgage backed securities.  that's a later stage where it starts to intervene  in the capital market itself and buy mortgage backed securities.  we'll leave that out for the moment.  i now want to just do imbalance sheets and show you what the fed did.  how to understand these different stages of response to crisis, okay?  so i, i had, i started the lecture by saying that the citi siv  look like this. there was residential  mortgage backed  securities  here and there  was asset  backed commercial  paper here as the  funding source,  okay? and there are shares here, okay?  so there are international investors or something that are, that's holding here.  and all of this is fine.  citi, citi's not in there, this is off balance sheet for citi,  it's not anywhere in the fed's balance sheet or anything like that, okay?  so the first stage of the crisis it looked maybe like a normal crisis, okay?  that money market mutual funds started to worry about  the value of the underlying asset, residential mortgage bank securities.  and they said i would just assume, you know, not renew this and get  some other kind of funding going. if you don't mind, okay?  and so citi did this, and they thought this was good business.  they thought they were going to make money doing this.  remember dealers are not in this.  you know, to, to make the world a nice  place, the're trying to make, the're trying to make  profits, okay?  and, and what did they think they where, how  did they think they were going to make a profit?  they thought they could make a profit by  letting, by replacing.  i'm not going to do all these  subtractions, i'm just going to cross them out.  okay.  when this matured, they replaced that funding with, with a loan from citibank.  so citibank said, we think those are really good  securities, we're happy to take them as security ourselves, okay?  against a loan, okay?  and then we will fund that loan on our  own balance sheet let's say even with a repurchase agreement.  okay?  the point being so that goes away and now its a repurchase agreement.  well, there's still this underlying security  here is, is the collateral for this.  but on the other hand now this repurchase agreement is a liability of citibank.  and so you have further recourse.  that if this asset turns out not to be worth  enough to pay this back then you have recourse against citibank.  and citibank has a big balance shake and so it's,  it's, you have a little more security and and so it's  fine, okay?  but then you start to worry a little bit more about that  security you say, you know what citibank, i don't really like, you know.  you're going to say you might say to me okay fine you keep the mortgage  back security and we're done i don't really want that to be so, okay?  i would rather actually have commercial paper  from you that's that's your unsecured liability, okay?  of citibank, that is based on your  whole asset book, everything, okay? commercial paper.  lets just call this maybe leiman too,  because remember you're talking about leiman issuing  all this unsecured commercial paper that was  bought by the primary reserve fund, right?  so a number of these big banks were in this business, okay?  and when their off-balance sheet deals started  to come unwound they saw profit opportunity.  they said, let us  take this off the balance sheet of the customers that don't  want to hold it anymore and hold it ourselves and charge for that.  and this will wind up, we're going to make money, we want to do this, okay?  and so no one was holding a gun to their head, they said this is good business,  let's do this, unsecured commercial paper here.  and or if you are a,  another possibility might be the euro-dollar market if you are a foreigner.  [sound]  because money market mutual funds also invest in paper,  that's issued by foreign banks, here in your dollar market.  all of this stuff happened.  if yo look at the flow of funds, you see that this was, this was happening.  there was a replacement of, of a certain kind of funding, with.  and then you got the traditional banking system sort of involved.  now, these traditional banks are of course backstopped by the fed and the fdic, okay?  in ways that these sivs were not.  so the collapse of the shadow banking system  happened in stages, it happened first, it collapsed onto  the traditional banking system.  and the money market mutual funds said, well that's fine, i'm  happy to do business with you because you have a backstop, okay.  and that makes me happy.  except that wasn't the end of the story, okay?  it continued, it continued to get get worse.  and it particularly continued to get worse for the european  banks that were doing these sorts of, these sorts sivs.  because they didn't have at all the kinds  of backstops that domestic banks in the us have.  they don't have as much access to the fed.  when they, and so when, when, when the money market mutual  fund said you know what, i know i lent you that  euro money dollar for a week but now the week is  up and i would like not to roll that over anymore.  the european banks are in trouble.  where are they going to get dollar funding?  where are they going to get dollars,  okay?  and this is where the fed stepped in, okay?  with the treasury too, okay?  and what they did was liquidity swaps  to, for with foreign central banks.  so we should have foreign central banks here too.  and and they, and they, the treasury got involved, holding treasury bills.  so that the money market mutual fund could  replace all of this, dodgy stuff with treasury bills.  that's what they wanted anyway. okay fine.  we've got treasury bills and now this  is a liquidity swap that is a loan  from the ecb, lets  say.  so there are very, there are various stages here, and they.  so now, let me return to here.  so you, you can sort of see these stages happen.  this, this element here, this sort of  orange bit, that's $600 billion of liquidity  swaps, that's at, at, at the peak of the, of the crisis, that's what's happening.  and this brown thing here, what is that?  treasury supplemental account,  that's basically there was a treasure, the treasury had deposited the fed.  and then they issued t-bills out the other side.  so i'm consolidating the fed and the treasury balances here.  because otherwise we'd have, we'd have, you  know, the whole length of the room here.  the point was to give money market  mutual funds what they wanted treasury bills, okay?  and to give your pn banks the funding they  needed, which was dollar funding that was channeled through  central bank channels, because the money markets were closed down.  so this is a sequence, from a normal crisis and  an attempt to absorb this crisis in a normal way.  by just letting the crisis move a little bit in order to  have an incentive for the normal banking system to take over, okay?  but it wasn't enough.  the crisis got worse and it, and it, and it exceeded their ability to absorb this.  the fed tried to help them in the way that the fed  normally tries to help them by lowering the fed funds rate, okay?  that wasn't enough.  the fed started then to intervene in this way, okay?  to enter into the term funding market, okay?  that's what you're seeing there, okay?  with the liquidity swaps and, and lending directly to dealers.  this, all the term facitlities, all of that is acting  as a backstop to this market. not just this market, okay?  so they're moving, they're moving up.  are moving down the hierarchy if you will, okay?  from the best money to now back stopping directly the banks,  not just lending them money but being the value investor, okay?  and, eventually they backstop the mortgage banks  security market which is that aquamarine thing there.  so they,  they, as the crisis kept getting worse they moved farther and farther, and they  moved more and more of the financial system on to their balance sheet, okay?  at no point, i, i, i, i'm sure this is right.  at no point did they want to do any of this.  central bankers are a conservative lot. okay.  they certainly don't want to take any credit risk, okay?  they don't want to take any interest rate risk, they don' want to take any risk.  risk.  you know?  that, that's why their money is the best money, okay?  they, they're not in general, taking risks.  in a crisis though, lend freely, okay?  at a high rate against what would be good security in a normal time.  that's basically what they, what they did.  there's a little bit of a difference because  you're dealing with asset markets that are long term.  which budget was, sort of, sort of, not.  i've, i started this lecture by talking about normal monetary policy, just  messing with the fed funds rate and having some effects on asset prices indirectly.  that you, what the fed does gets transmitted  to the rest of the economy by these profit  maximizing dealers and markets and arbitrage and all of this.  so the fed is, sort of, at a distance from the market.  it's messing with the overnight fed funds rate.  and all, everything else just, sort of, happens  with, with, with other people interacting with each other.  the fed is, sort of, at a distance.  normally that's enough because these, the, the rest of the system has  enough elasticity in it that if there's fluctuations and demand and so forth.  they, they cause fluctuations and prices and, and people behaved  in a way to absorb those fluctuations and everything is fine.  this is the way the system works in normal, in normal times.  but when it gets out of control, okay?  when it, when the, when the fluctuations  are too large, the imbalances are too large.  the imbalances that had built up over decades  of the fed keeping interest rates too low, perhaps.  or not allowing crises to wipe out the tinder  that was, that was building up in the forest, okay?  when the crisis starts, it doesn't just, it's  not just temporary it continues to get worse.  and as it continues to get worse, the feds responsibility as the ultimate backstop  causes it, forces it, okay? to do more.  to do more and more and more, okay? until it has put a floor on the system.  the reason it can put a floor on the system is  because its own liabilities are the best money in the system.  ultimately it could put the entire system on its own balance sheet.  if people didn't want to hold any  risky security at all, the fed could buy them  all and give them all cash for it, okay?  ultimately.  now that's the end of the market system, really, okay?  but you this is at least you know  feasible, you could do this, you could do this.  but the fed doesn't want to do this and it certainly doesn't want to  do this just at the first indication of trouble, it want, it keeps hoping.  it keeps hoping that,  you know, we don't really have to do that much, do we?  maybe if we just do this, that will be enough, okay?  this is this is what the ecb is doing now, right?  let's do just enough and maybe that will cause enough pressure  because of the disequilibrium to cause politicians to do the right thing.  and maybe it won't and if doesn't then we'll do more okay?  and that's where we, that's where we are.  so we are living today through  a slow motion collapse, possibly, okay?  if of, of the european system which, you know,  keep in mind what happens in these slow motion collapses.  nothing happens, every now and then there's a  lot of excitement, you know, like bars, okay?  but they are preceded by building up stresses and, and that doesn't  and, and the crisis doesn't necessarily resolve itself for a long time.  so, this is, this is the nature of  the system that we're, that we're dealing with.  [blank_audio]  
[sound].  i showed you what the balance sheet of the fed looked like before the crisis.  more than a lot of loans to main street there,  there was a lot of loans to the government, right?  treasury bills were the main asset of, of the, of, of, of the federal reserve.  and that was almost immediately true, because once the fed  was created, the, the, the u.s. went to war again.  okay, and the fed got involved not so much in this kind of action.  okay, but in financing another war.  and so at the end of the war, the fed, the reserve banks,  and in fact, even all the member banks were stuffed full of treasury bills.  that's what they had.  they had treasury bills, as a consequence of war.  and so the whole system in the 20's, even when, even when alan young was writing.  the banks, the fed reserve banks, are all stuff full of treasury bills.  he doesn't mention this.  he's imagining that this is temporary, right?  that this is not how  the system was supposed to work, okay?  it's temporary, and so they're trying to figure out a  temporary way of creating elasticity in, this kind of elasticity.  without the mechanism that they imaged would provide it.  and he's imagining, open market operations.  he talks about open market operations.  none of this could happen, okay, because  all the banks are filled with treasury bills.  so instead what we had  was open market operations.  [sound].  open market operations were invented  [sound],  by the new york fed, by benjamin strong in the 20's.  exactly when allen young is writing.  this thing you've learned in your  intermediate macro, even intro macro class, right?  about how the fed changed the money supply by  buying treasury bills or selling treasury bills or something.  that's what we mean by, by, by open market operations, right?  i'm not going to write down those balance sheets, because in  fact that fed never did use that mechanism to change.  that, that's not actually true, how open operations work.  it involves the repo market and other things, but we,  we're going to get to that okay, in, in a while.  i, i just want to say, to emphasize here, that  the importance of open market operations is a historical accident, okay?  it's an accident that the fed got stuffed with treasury bills.  it was never supposed to lend to the government.  this is why i tell you all this history, right?  the whole danger  of central banking is that, is legal tenders, the greenbacks  are in the minds of the framers of the federal reserve.  it's like, give the government power to  print money, and it is going to print money.  so, we want to make sure that you are only allowed  to use loans to main street as collateral for expanding the reserves.  only use loans to main street as collateral for expanding federal reserve  notes, okay? but then came world war, world war i.  the cat was out of the bag. and we got used to that.  where now you, no one now finds it weird to say look at  that, the, the, the federal reserve is stuffed full of treasure bills, you know.  people thought that's the way it should be.  in fact they found it weird when the, when the federal reserve liquidated  all those treasure bills and made loans to banks, to the private sector.  or to chrysler or  you know, in his commercial paper operations and so forth.  they found that weird, but somebody who had a knowledge of history would remember.  there's nothing natural about this.  central banks don't necessarily lend mainly to the government.  it wasn't supposed to, in the first place. that wasn't, that wasn't the idea.  okay, so let's let's draw some conclusions here.  i think it's about time.  what, what i'm trying to, i mean i'm, i'm partly trying  to get you used to this balance sheet way of thinking, okay?  but there is actually a, a conceptual point here  too, about the relationship, between the government, state money.  and private money in the banking system.  it's a complex thing, you know?  we, we live in a hybrid system that  is partly, where, where the central bank is partly  a bankers bank. so it's a bank for other banks.  in times of crisis, it's a government bank.  it provide, it helps the government sell its bonds, in, in war.  it did this is world war i.  it did this in world war ii.  it'll do it again, you know?  if we, this, this is what it will, this is what it will do.  and that's its job.  that's not, it's not any kind of perversion of, of its job.  that is its job.  in normal times, it's, it facilitates the  operations of private, of private capital markets.  and it's moving back and forth between, between those, over, over, time.  here's another one of those instances, where you can build monetary theory, okay?  by imagining that really at the root of everything is the state  that is printing money, and everything else is just a promise to that.  and so it's really all about the state, okay?  or you can build a whole monetary theory by  saying really, it's all, the private banking system, okay?  and the government is making use of the private banking system  to borrow, or something like that, okay?  so we start with the original, the gold standard,  and people borrowing and buy, you know, making pledges.  so you can build monetary theories that are pure private money.  and you can build monetary theories that are pure state money.  and neither of these is going to do you any good.  because the actual system is a hybrid. the actual system is a hybrid.  and it, and it moves back and forth.  sometimes, it's more one, sometimes it's more the other.  here's another example, where it's better to know  two theories which claim to be opposites, okay?  because both of them are true, in some dimension, okay?  both of them are true about the part of the system they're talking about, okay?  but not about the whole system. so, again, i find myself, you know, in,  in, in between, not being willing, not being a chartalist.  well but neither being a medallist either, okay?  but understanding both of those positions, the elasticity position  and the, and the, and the, and the discipline position.  the monotrous position and the keynesian position, okay?  they both get at genuine features of the actual system.  i find this balance sheet approach, very helpful for  letting us know when, when one approach makes sense.  and when we should  be, when we should be focusing on  the other approach, because this is always true.  the balance sheet approach is, is really just  a relationship between debits and la, debits and credits.  so, this will, this will always work for you.  whether you're talking about state money,  or whether you're talking about private money.  you can use the same language, so it's a great bridging  technique, and that's why, that's why i emphasize it in this course.  
money and time. liquidity constraint.  what happens if our cash inflow is not large enough to meet our cash commitments?  okay. there are three things, that we can do.  and, that. we can see it from this set of accounts.  okay.  if we have to make some payment on this side okay,  we have some commitment.  we have to make some payment on this side, and we don't  have a source at the moment, okay, we have three choices, okay.  we can spend all the cash in our reserves, dishoard.  we can run through the cash.  we can try to find somebody to lend us some more.  okay?  cash.  or, we can sell something, at whatever price we can get firesale.  okay?  those are the three, those are the three choices.  i suppose you can sell some goods too, but selling financial assets is, is.  is the one we're going to focus on here.  these are our three choices for meeting a, for meeting the liquidity constraint.  and note that the only one that is actually  dependable in a time of crisis is the first one.  the others all  rely on somebody else taking the opposite side of that transaction.  you know.  if we borrow, as our, in order to meet, in order to have some cash inflow  to meet our commitments, someone has to lend,  someone has to be persuaded to do that.  if we sell a financial asset, somebody has to be persuaded to buy  that and there has to be a good price there for, for, for them.  and they may not want to do that, they may not want to help us out.  in that way.  this is why reserves are important. money is important.  at the end of the day it is cash okay, that allows  it's these reserves that allow you to to meet your cash commitments but.  there's the discipli-, that's the discipline piece.  nobody wants to hold.  we can't rely only on, on money. okay?  credit allows us to, to escape the liquidity constraint.  to put off  this constraint to the future, right?  if we can borrow, that means we live to fight another day.  however, that other day, is when this borrowing comes due okay, and then  we face that constraint again, when we have to, we have to, repay that.  so, this is again this balance between discipline and elasticity.  credit gives us elasticity today but discipline  tomorrow.  
the federal reserve system.  okay. the federal reserve system.  we could it was on the gold standard then so there's gold here.  okay? and there are federal reserve, federal  reserve notes as a liability and there's also bank reserves  here which  are reserves.  okay? and the fed also can run some,  credit. intra-day, on it's own books.  something called fedwire. that's what it's called now.  now it's electronic. okay.  fedwire.  by the way the this, this clearing, clearing system is called chips  now. you'll, you'll read about that in, in  [unknown].  so there two clearings systems.  one is private, one is completely private, and one is public, fedwire.  so what happens in the real world is that  chips clears first, okay, and then fedwire clears second, okay.  and fedwire is real money, okay.  this is deposits to fed, okay, the ultimate, the ultimate.  so you can have building up of overdrafts and,  and balances due to, due from's during the day.  okay, just like this, okay?  at the end of the day, okay, if you don't have a  balance, if you don't have a positive balance at the fed, so  you're like this net from a person, you need to borrow from  a member, you need to, you need to borrow from somebody else, okay.  that's what the feds funds market is which we're going to talk about next time.  okay?  or if, or you default. okay?  or you can borrow from the fed,  borrow from the fed. okay?  so there's a net from a,  net to b, okay?  this intra-day credit that could be built up.  and, one way that you could settle this is basically for b  to make a loan to a, through the fed funds market.  okay, that's one way but, if, if they can't  find each other or b's not willing to do that.  no one's forcing them to do this okay, then the fed can make the loan itself.  so these are discount loans  by expanding its own balance sheet.  the fed will do this and you can see this on the balance sheet of the fed.  some of these little loans to troubled banks.  you can see this on the balance sheet.  they're not very large.  typically you're dealing with, with troubled, troubled banks  and they're con, they're constantly dealing with troubled banks.  and every, i don't know every week one fails you  know there's a lot of banks in the united states.  so there's, there's, there's a lot of this  and they're paying, and this whole divisions paying  attention to this.  it doesn't matter anything for the aggregate.  until there's a system of stress just like the clearinghouse, okay.  and then the fed can and does do what the clearinghouse did except it's all legal.  it's all legal it's just expanding monetary policy.  it's expanding both sides of its balance sheet in order to  make there be more, more of the best money in the system.  that's basically what bernanke is doing.  he's just, he's, he's buying, buying mortgage bank securities.  [sound]  that's what he's doing. that's, that's qe right there.  okay.  so he's not just making loans to banks, he's actually buying securities from  whoever, whoever has them, okay, in the, in the economy as a whole.  this is not what the, the new york clearinghouse would ever do.  okay.  it's a, it's a, it's a club. okay.  the fed is, has more people as a member of its club.  more member banks, to begin with. okay.  throughout, throughout the country.  but it also is willing to, to, as in times of crisis.  to basically lend to broker dealers, and buy mortgage-backed securities.  that's what it is.  that's what is has been doing during this continuing set of problems.  so there's a, there's a sort of strict analogy.  between a private clearing \house and a public, clearing house here.  they made, they run on the same principles, they have different sets of  membership, different rules, different priorities, but the  actual mechanics are very much the same.  
fed funds are unsecured overnight loans. unsecured.  there's no collateral, okay. if chase,  okay whose, whose this loan to this is this, this is here, okay.  well this is an asset, okay. so, make this a liability.  if citibank  does not pay hsbc, okay, there is no recourse.  there's not a, i mean, you can sue them.  yes, there's recourse in that sense, but it's not as  if there's some collateral that you then possess, you know.  mortgages is, is, is secure, right.  if i don't pay citibank, they take my house.  you know, it's complicated, they don't want to do it.  they certainly, it's not really a good way to do business, they're not intending  to do this.  but there's security behind this mortgage loan.  there's no security behind this fed funds loan, there's no asset of any kind.  it's the general promise of the citi, of citibank, and if  citibank doesn't pay you, all you can do is sue them, okay.  and, and get a court, a judgement to force them, to force them to pay.  it's an unsecured loan.  similarly, the euro dollar market is unsecured  inter-bank loans. why would anybody do this?  you know, this is a lot of money.  this is a million dollars we just talked about.  overnight.  overnight.  just an electronic blip.  i'm lending you a million dollars overnight and all i'm depending on  is that tomorrow you're going to pay me because you said you would, okay.  i wouldn't do that for you.  no. you wouldn't do that for me.  banks are doing this for each other because they're in a network.  this is their business and they, and tomorrow they'll  be, they'll be on the other side of that transaction.  and they're going back and forth.  and they're paying attention, very close attention,  to how their exposure to particular counter parties.  the don't have collateral, but they can say,  you know what, i'm a little worried about citibank.  you know, we already, okay, are, are into them for $10 million.  why don't we just tell them, go somewhere else for your fed funds.  you're lying  to us, your credit line to us is full.  so when you read stigum, and she talks  about credit lines, that's what she's talking about.  she's talking about hsbc managing its exposure, saying i'll  lend so much to citibank and no more, okay.  i'll lend so much to other, so you're having  a diversified portfolio here of, of fed funds loans.  you're not lending it all to one person  who could default on you and ruin you, okay.  you're trying to spread it around, okay.  and similarly on, on, on, on, on, on this side.  fed funds are unsecured interbank credits.  this whole market, particularly the euro dollar market,  is however in great stress right now, okay.  people don't want to lend on security, okay.  they want a lend secured, okay.  because they're worried about what's going to happen to my counterparties.  it's a lot particularly in europe, there's a lot of, a lot of stress  in lot of insolvent banks in europe.  and it's not a good idea to be making unsecured loans  to somebody you fear is insolvent and so you just don't.  you just don't.  that's why, you know, a broker might set this thing up, and then you look at  them and you say, you know, nice, but  i'm not having any credit exposure with you, okay.  so, that's not going to work.  but i'm willing to this if, if, if you can get a dealer  to stand in between and, and, and do that.  but a dealer is worried too, because this is  a highly leveraged business on both, on both sides.  if i, if, if citibank doesn't pay hsbc how am i going to pay chase?  you know, this isn't a pass through.  i can't say to chase oh, i didn't get my  money, when i get my money, you'll get your money.  no. this is an overnight loan, okay.  if you don't pay, then you default. you have  a survival constraint yourself.  there's survival constraints all along, these are unsecured, unsecured loans.  this is not.  repurchase agreements are secured loans. there's collateral there.  there's a treasury bill.  this doesn't mean that it has nothing to do with your life and my life, okay.  it's just, this is where the rubber hits the road actually.  this is where the large amounts of money are getting transferred, you know.  this is where all the risk is being taken in this, in this world.  this is where all the liquidity is being created.  so this is what we need to understand if we want to understand what we read in  the newspaper everyday.  the fed funds market is the, is sort of  the market for the best money in the world, okay.  reserves at the fed, okay.  euro dollars is, is another unsecured market.  rp, which we're going to talk about next time, is  secured borrowing and lending in the, in the money market.  once we understand these, we are, we are at the very core of the international  payment system, and we can build our understanding  of the money market up and around, okay.  
[noise],  remember that the typical relationship between these rates.  okay?  is that libor is the highest one.  fed funds is in the middle and repo is below that.  okay?  this itself, i think is something that needs to  be explained and once we understand that, then, then,  it's just going to be in the way the opposite  explanation when we, when we, when we get to.  now she raises, stigham says this if you've read the chapter.  she puzzles over this, too.  you know why, why is this the pattern.  why is this the pattern?  she's not so much worried about libor, but why are fed funds greater than rp.  okay? and she has two reasons that she gives.  one she, one which sounds very common-sensical  and i think is accepted by almost everybody.  okay?  is that well, look that makes sense because  repos agreements are secured and fed funds are not.  and so that spread is just a sort of credit spread.  it's a, it's a default risk spread or something like that.  that's what, that's what that must be.  now we, we know that that can't, we know that  that can't really be true because now it's in reverse.  so  [laugh]  so but, but we didn't know that back then  so, and i didn't find it convincing back then either.  okay?  and the reason is this, nobody leds  fed funds, leds, lends in the unsecured market.  okay?  with any thought at all that there is going to be defaults.  okay?  if you think there's going to be default, you just don't lend, you know.  you control this with your credit line, you  know, you just say, i'm not going to lend you.  you don't say i'm going to lend to you, at a little higher rate.  [unknown]  did you see the numbers, 137 dollars? you know, who risks a million dollars?  okay?  to make 137 dollars worth of interest, you know, overnight?  it's just not worth it.  better to just not do the loan at all. okay?  so i don't think it's right to say, that  although they're unsecured, there in some sense have default risk.  i, i just, it doesn't seem right.  also in fact, you're dealing here with banks, you know  who have recourse to the fed, to borrow it, it doesn't seem right.  it doesn't seem, right that this could really be a default risk.  the other answer she proposes, and other people say maybe  too, is oh well, this is because, maybe this is  just because some people have to borrow on fed funds  market and don't have access to the rp market or something.  you know, there's an arbitrage.  right? that should, should be happening here.  but anyone can do, there are many, many people who can do this arbitrage.  you know certainly any bank can borrow in the rp  market and lend in the f, in the fed funds market.  so, why wouldn't you, why wouldn't you, you know, so, it, they don't seem  compelling to me, these, these answers. so what is compelling to me?  partly this comes to walter bagehot.  and i'm talk, and i will tell you in a week or two about the world that bagehot  lived in, and that world, what we need to  know for here is just a little sketch of that.  which is a world where there's a market rate of interest.  where bill brokers and people in the  london money market are trading with each other.  and they're creating market rate of interest.  and then there's the official rate of interest.  the bank rate of interest, which is the discount rate  quoted by the central bank, by the bank of england.  usually, the, the bank rate is  greater, than the market rate.  and because of that, people don't come to the  bank to do discounts until the market rate pushes up.  and the stresses in the market drive up drive up the  market rate of interest and when it hits the, the bank rate  they all flood to the bank of england for discount.  that's how monetary policy worked back, back then.  this then just putting on my, my  historical and also institutional hat i said to  myself, i think this is more or less, the way it worked before the crisis.  okay? in the united states.  okay?  except that the analog of bank rate was the fed funds target.  okay?  and the analog of the market rate was repo.  okay?  so the repo, the repo rate was below, fed  funds as a way of creating discipline in the market.  but the  [inaudible],  the balance of discipline and elasticity.  this isn't the first time you've heard these words.  okay?  rp is the cheapest.  so, the first place you go to try to borrow is rp.  okay?  and you know that you, and you borrow as much as you can.  this is how dealers operate.  you, you do, you try to repo out of all your securities, all of them.  okay?  it's the cheapest form of borrowing there is.  okay? if you need more funds.  okay?  you know that you're going to have to go to the more expensive money.  okay?  so, this is the discipline part. okay?  if you are a dealer, you have to go to the bank.  your, your, your, the dealer's bank and you borrow and you do not borrow  at the fed funds rate, you borrow at fed funds plus 50 basis points.  
so i want to think about a situation. okay, where a bank  is asked to make a yen loan.  but this bank does not have access to yen funding, okay?  it has access to dollar funding.  okay. and let's take time out of it.  so let's say it has access to, and it, it  does fund it in the six month euro dollar market.  so for this, for this bank here, their problem  is that not time, everything is matched up in time.  that's all fine.  okay?  their problem is they're not matched up in currency.  and again, there's derivative markets out there, okay, forward, forward  exchange contracts, okay, that help you line things up in time.  you can get rid of this foreign  exchange exposure, this foreign exchange risk exposure.  but what i'm going to show you is how you could  do it with a swap of ious, okay, with another bank.  how would you get rid of it with a swap of ious?  you would get rid of it by swapping a dollar  deposit, for six months for a yen deposit,  for six months.  with somebody else over here who takes the other side of that yen deposit  for six months. dollar deposit,  for six months.  okay? this is a swap of values.  we do this swap at the current spot rate.  okay?  and so what's, what happens then when all this matures, okay?  this yen deposit, there's an interest rate associated with this.  so let's not, let's, let's not put an f there and be mysterious about this.  now we know what we're going to do in the logic of what we're going to do.  let's just use the same logic we used  over there. okay.  there's an interest rate on this, we'll use our  star there, for a six-month interest rate in yen.  so if you added a yen deposit, here's the going interest rate in  the, in the euro-yen market, which is quoted every day in the ft.  okay.  and there's, and there's a deposit rate here, too.  and we'll use that without a star, okay, because the dollar is special, okay.  it's the domestic currency for everyone.  it's the world funding currency here.  and the same over here.  this is 1 plus r star is going to be the  interest rate, and this is going to be the interest rate here.  and  now, i'm going to, suggest to you another arbitrage condition, here.  okay?  let us say that we had, that this was for one dollar, to make it easy, okay?  so, if we have this arrangement here, okay?  at the end of six months we're going to have 1 plus r, 06 dollars here, okay?  at the end of six months, well how many yen did we have?  well, we, we, we first exchanged our dollars  into yen at the current spot exchange rate.  call that the spot exchange rate  and we're quoting rates as yen over dollars.  okay.  so maybe that's like a 100 yen per dollar.  that's the order of magnitude you know that yen, yen are more like pennies.  okay.  so if we have one dollar, we change them to this many yen, and so at the end of six  months, we're going to have 1 plus r star, okay,  yen. so what is hapenning, okay?  at the end of 6 months, i gotta pay that many yen.  okay?  and it's a liability, okay?  and i'm going to receive from my counter party there that many dollars.  i gotta pay this many yen, i gotta receive this many dollars.  there's an implicit exchange rate there. right?  i'm paying yen, i'm getting dollars.  what's the exchange rate that would lock, that i  could lock in today with this balance sheet structure?  that's the forward rate.  that's the forward exchange rate. and, it's right here, and  we call it f6. okay?  and it has to be equal to them. >>  [cough]  >> f6 because it's the forward rate for six months from now, okay?  this is called covered interest parity.  the same logic applies there, as applies here.  that these things basically, are, are almost definitions of these forward rates.  this is the forward interest rate, okay? this is the forward exchange rate.  and they sort of have to be that. because these are market interest rates.  you can roll your own by, by going long and short existing instruments.  and if you can roll your own, then, then the,  then the outright forward has to be the same price.  otherwise, there's an arbitrage, in both cases.  
so this is a choice, a policy choice.  and the bank can do that because it's sitting at the top, okay?  but the bank itself, that's, so this is the  issue of internal drain and the art of central banking.  [sound]  so if notes are draining out of the  banking system into, into the arms of firms.  okay.  so the banks don't have enough reserves or so forth, that's an internal drain.  and the bank of england, can can ease the internal drain by  letting loose of it's own notes, and by creating good substance for them.  okay, in both cases.  or it, or  it doesn't, it can choose, what it thinks is best, for the economy.  but it certainly is able to do this, there's no problem.  the problem comes with an external drain. of notes  and ultimately  gold.  okay. if it's foreigners.  who want notes. if it's foreigners, they want gold.  then the bank of england has to give them gold.  and when the bank, the bank of england faces discipline, above it.  the bank of england may be the, the, the money market  in london may be the center of the world money market.  okay?  but the bank of england ultimately is one central bank, and there are others.  and if those central banks are unwilling to accept deposits at,  at the bank of england as the equivalent of notes and they demand gold.  then the bank of england has to give in gold, this is the gold standard  and this is the other reason.  so, so this thing here, looking up in the hierarchy, the central bank faces  this same constraint that other banks do, which is to say, if it's losing gold.  if it's cash, it's measuring cash flow, gold in, gold out.  right?  and remember, it's this is the center of the world financial system,  so you're discounting all the bills in the world and you're getting  repaid from all the bills in the world.  so, there's a gold in gold out thing that's going on at the, at the  level of the country as a whole and the bank of england is where that happens.  and the bank of england can raise its  discount rate when it wants to discourage discount.  what does that do?  just like a bank's lower below. it says, please don't come to me.  you know, to discount and then take the gold out of my country.  go to france.  you know, go, go to the bank of, go to another bank, right?  just like the banks below, say don't come to  me, go to, you know, go, go down the road.  so the bank of england can do this and,  and, one, one of the, it could, it could orient.  and it has to focus on this, it has to pay attention to this.  there's a discipline here in the system that the bank of england itself faces.  because if it doesn't, what happens?  bank of france. oh, i, i took down the slide there.  it can lose all its gold.  it can, and, and will have to go, will have to suspend payments.  and say, you know, i promised you this note was convertible into gold.  and it will be.  later, just not now, okay, and occasionally, every now and  then, the bank of england has to do things like that.  so this tension, this stress in the  system, this flow, cash inflow, cash outflow.  i'm trying to tell you a story here about  how it's managed, how it's managed in a decentralized way.  by individual banks attending to the in, outflow  and inflow of notes on their own balance sheet.  individual banks, moving the discount rate up and down, deciding to rediscount,  you know, all of those things, but they're watching the cashflow.  that leads to a market rate of interest.  and then above them, you have central banks doing  the same thing, moving discount rates up and down.  okay.  the bank of england used to say, there used to be a saying.  i think it was, was it 3% or was it 6%?  you could draw gold from the moon, okay, if you,  if you if you pay a high enough rate of interest.  what is the bank of england doing when it's drawing gold from the moon?  it's saying, i'm going to charge  an awful lot for discounts. okay.  so, people don't come.  and so they repay their bills. because  [unknown]  don't come in, there's a, there's a shift toward repayment of,  of maturing bills and all of those are repaid in gold.  and there are no new bills, so there's no gold that flows out again.  okay, they drawing of gold from the moon involves  a contraction of credit, that's what that is, okay.  its a contraction of credit that the bank of  england can use in order to secure its position here.  and to maintain par  in the gold market.  so the central bank, the bank of england, badgett's world.  okay?  is, is a source of potential elasticity looking down.  okay?  but it faces its own constraint looking up.  okay?  in the, in the, in the gold standard.  okay?  looking down, looking up, at, at its position in the world.  young makes a very, you know? this, have a look at that chapter again.  makes a very big point that the whole word  monetary system is being run on very little gold.  okay, because the gold that's actually being used,  okay, is the gold in the banking department, okay.  the rest of the gold is sort of locked up,  just back in the notes, you know, it's not flowing anywhere.  the gold that flows, is the gold that's in the banking department, and  there's not very much of it. why are they able to do this?  because of the sophistication of the money market.  okay. that if you need gold.  you can borrow, you can borrow it from other central banks.  there's realtions between central banks.  and this is the point looking up now.  just as when, when this bank ran into trouble, okay, he  could borrow from other banks, the same is true of central banks.  if central  banks were all willing to borrow and lend reserves, gold  to each other okay, they could jointly relax this constraint.  right.  just as banks that are willing to borrow and lend in the  fed funds market right can, can relax the survival constraint that's facing them.  but will they?  and what are the institutional mechanisms to enforce that, and to encourage that?  okay?  monetary economists always speak about central bank cooperation,  but central bank cooperation also involves sort of  national interests, and the, and the interference of  politicians and finance ministers, and that sort of thing.  it's easier said than done.  this cooperation among, among central banks that's required and if you  don't get cooperation with the central banks, what do you get?  you get the survival constraint binding on the  sub central banks.  the central banks, and a central bank that has a binding survival constraint on its  own balance sheet has no choice but to raise, raise interest rates.  has no choice but to raise interest rates even if the  consequence of that is to crunch all the banks underneath it.  so, if the central bank itself is facing discipline  it's going to, it's going to transmit that discipline down, down.  does this sound familiar to you? things like this happening in the world?  yeah.  so, the central bank is in, is in  an interesting position, it's, it's, it's in between.  it's in, it's, it's, it's, it's not at the absolute top, it faces it's own  survival constraint which it can relax if  it can deal with other, other central banks.  it can impose discipline on the banking system below it.  it doesn't have to unless it, it, it has discipline imposed on itself.  okay.  these are matters of, of policy.  this is the world that badgett knew. okay.  and it's not so different from our own world, actually.  okay.  but it's a quite a different way of thinking about what central banks do.  we're used in monetary you know we, we do macro or something.  you have islm, you're thinking about moving the interest rate  in order to encourage aggregate demand, or something like this.  this is where it all started. where it all started was this.  thinking about the role of, of the central bank.  bank rate, market rate and dealing with the survival constraint.  this decentralized way of sending messages about where you  are and what is the state of the system.  when the market, money market rate gets bigger, gets  higher okay, that means there's strasses in the system somewhere.  this is like a a  reliable indicator of the state of the economy  is, is the, is the money rate of interest.  that's what people watched all the time.  you know, because everyone was in this business.  these firms are, are watching this.  they're, they're trying to decide.  maybe i should hold some notes, okay, or maybe things,  maybe i should own earn hold earnings assets, you know.  am i going to need to safeguard my liquidity,  you know what what, they are watching this very,  very closely.  and that what's coordinating the economy as a whole,  and that is what's coordinating the world as a whole.  because the lending money market is the world money market, at that time.  it's enough to make you think the money market  is god, and want to really watch it closely.  hence, lombard's book.  people bought this book. it was a best seller.  it was a best seller.  the money market was very present in everyone's life in the 19th century.  in 19th  century britain.  
there's this thing about ponzi and speculative and hedge units.  you'll, you'll see in the reading for this week.  okay.  i think that this is not, that this is  reading minsky through standard economics and not through morris copeland.  if you read it through morris copeland, you'll  understand that he is talking about the alignment.  the issue is the alignment of cash flows and commitments in time.  this constraint, cash inflow is greater then cash commitments, okay?  is something that, that agents that are like banks worry about.  not just today but tomorrow and the day after and looking into the future, okay?  and if we're  facing a problem today if we can push it  into the future that les, let's us fight another day.  but let's be careful where in the future we push it, you know?  because we know what our other commitments are.  and let's try not to push it where we have other commitments.  we have to push it somewhere where we think we're going to have some cash flow.  that would be good, okay?  so there's this, so let me now just give you an example.  so here's, here's an agent. a liquid agent or a hedge agent as  [noise]  and we'll think about time as having four periods.  [noise]  t, t plus 1, t plus 2, t plus 3, and  we'll think about cash in flow and  cash commitments. cash in flow, cash flow, cash commitments.  [cough]  for all these examples let's assume that we have a notion that we're going to get  cash flow of 10. and let's think of ourselves  as having promised pay 20.  so we're having, over these four periods, we're getting 40 coming in, okay?  and we promise to pay 20.  so there's no problem here of solvency, right?  we're, we're making money, you know?  we're, we're, we're making 40, we're spending 20.  we have a profit of 20.  there's no problem here of solvency.  i'm trying to take solvency out of the picture, okay?  and tell you that there still is a problem.  equity can be a problem for you.  suppose we arranged our financing so that we made a  promise to pay 5, 5, 5, every period like that, okay?  we got no problem.  right? cash flow is greater  than cash commitment, every single period from now through.  there's no problem.  there's no problem.  the liquidity constraint does not bind. we're not going to be in trouble.  we're not going to have to face that problem of, oh my  god, i made a promise, how am i going to meet it?  am i going to liquidate my cash? am i going to borrow?  am i going to sell a financial asset?  it's never going to arise. it's never going to rise if this is how  our financing is arranged.  [sound].  on the other hand,  if, suppose our financing is arranged this way.  again 10. it's  all short-term financing, right. that's what this is.  this is like financing your business.  your business is going to be coming in, have cash flow of 10, 10, 10, 10.  nice business, but it's all finacned with short-term debt, so it all is due today.  i owe 20 today. i only have cash flow today of 10, okay?  i'm facing now a constraint. and i have to do one of those things.  i have to use up whatever reserves i have of money in order to, to meet that.  or i have to roll over that debt meaning i have  to find somebody who'll let me push that into the next period.  or i have to sell my business or, or something like that.  this is, this is the liquidity constraint in action here.  and you, and you can see it often is, when you  have short term borrowing, that's the sign that you're, you're, you're vulnerable.  and of course real banks are sort of like that.  they have demand deposits.  so they're all facing this constraint, all the time.  and they're borrowing overnight,  repo markets, and so forth.  so the overnight borrowing market is  going to be really important in this class.  people always wonder, why are you focusing so much on overnight borrowing?  it's because, if you need to live to fight another day, okay?  that's where all the liquidity is, and you live to fight another day.  and then tomorrow's another day. and you have to do it again.  'kay.  you have to roll that over again.  the overnight borrowing market is enormous, and  you would never know it because you and  i do not participate in this. this is a wholesale money market.  i'm just going to give you another example.  [noise]  again, 10, 10, 10 every period, okay?  but now let's say.  i have a little  leeway, okay?  today, i got no problem. tomorrow,  or next year, i could have a problem, and i can see it coming.  i see the alignment of my cash flows and cash committments  in time and i say, in fact my creditors see that too.  everyone see, they see that, okay? these things are  [inaudible]  in time.  there's going to be a problem in the future and, and  i could today try to take some action to deal with  that by refinancing that so that it doesn't, it, i  get rid of it and i spread it out over time.  or maybe paying some of it ahead of time using this 10, you know?  or, whatever.  okay.  the point, why, why, i mean these simple little examples.  why am i belaboring this? the point is  that liquidity constraints anticipated in the future  have consequences today, for liquidity today, right.  that your, your anticipating that and you're saying, oh but i'm  pretty liquid today so let me, let me take care of that.  let me trade in some market while i actually have some room  to maneuver so that this doesn't come and smack me in the head.  because i don't know.  it may be that the markets are just  all frozen tomorrow and i'm going to be in trouble.  and no  one is willing, even though i'm perfectly solvent, right?  this is by assumption here.  i'm perfectly solvent.  if the markets aren't going to let me roll that over, i'm dead.  i don't want to be dead, okay?  i want to, i want to sort this out beforehand, okay?  so the picture, i'm trying to pain for you of the economy.  is an economy in which there are, at any moment in time,  lots of different agents, with different patterns of cash flow.  and different patterns of commitments, going out into the future, okay?  there's seem agents like this, there's some  agents like this, there's some agents like this.  okay.  and they're all participating in the same  market, they're all trading with each other, okay?  the fraction of agents that are under stress like this,  an agent that's under stress like this has to do something.  they can't wait.  they have to do it now.  they have to borrow now..  short term interest rates are 10%, short term interest rates are 20%.  it doesn't matter. i have to borrow now.  they are price-insensitive.  the more people there are like this, these interest rates can really move.  and they have nothing to do with time preference clearly,  right?  you know, when you, you, you, you think usually think of interest rates  as being reflecting something about time  preference for consumption today versus consumption tomorrow.  i'm pointing out to you that this person has to borrow.  no matter what the price, okay?  and if you have an inelastic demand for money like this,  the price can move very far from its, its equilibrium rates.  think bear stearns, you know, before, before it collapsed.  think lehman.  think this is the sort of thing that causes  financial crisis when they're agents like this in the economy.  and basically this is what all banks look like.  they have demand deposits.  they have short-term liabilities like this that can go away tomorrow.  so the vulnerability in the economy has to do with the fractions of  agents that are like this who are having trouble with rolling over their debt.  if there's a lot of agents like this,  you know, the hedge agents, okay? they have x.  they have to say well what am i going to do about extra five, okay?  well, i've gotta buy something, okay?  and so they're, they're, they're lending into the  market or they're buying something, it's going somewhere, okay?  so over the course of a business cycle, there is a fluctuation between a  easy credit and tight credit and that shows up in the money market.  
what can kill a clearinghouse?  this is, there, what can kill a clearing house, if you're thinking about this.  is that, people withdraw their gold.  and they say, i need that gold and i can't participate anymore.  now, why would they do that? why would they do that?  we make a distinction here between  an internal drain  and an external drain.  we're going to develop these things throughout the course.  okay.  if the internal drain comes from the fact that somewhere inside the  country somebody wants cash and you have to pay them cash, okay.  the clearinghouse can sort of sort that out with these sorts of mechanisms here.  but if there's an external drain, okay, that is the bank of england, okay,  or some foreigner that wants the money that is a higher level than this.  okay, that can kill your clearing house,that can kill your  clearing house and it has killed clearing houses in the past,  similarly for central banks,  but if there's an external drain. okay?  and your people are coming to you, foriegn central banks are coming to you with  federal reserve notes and asking for gold for them, you can run out of gold.  okay, because your, you don't have gold covering all of this thing.  you could run out of gold, and when you run out of gold, what do you do?  okay, you susspend payments, that's the word, suspend payments.  meaning i'm not going to pay you gold  anymore, i know these were promises to pay gold, i changed my mind.  it's not true, okay, i will pay you gold.  some time later, kay, in the future, i promise i'm really  going to do this, but i can't really tell you exactly when, okay.  at the moment, i'm just spending payment.  i'm not going to make good on my promise to pay these things in gold.  that's like, you know, that's suspending  the exchange rate fixed with gold, this idea that you're making.  you're, you're going to maintain par.  the mint par with, with gold.  and all central banks do this from time to time.  okay?  the bank of england did this periodically. when there's a crisis, you can handle it.  if it's an internal crisis, you can  sort of handle it by expanding your balance sheet.  okay, but if if your whole country  is losing reserves.  you have to, you have, the only way to  get elasticity is to, is to eliminate the constraint.  is to eliminate the discipline by going off gold okay.  and unless unless you can get all the other  central banks to agree to act as a clearing house and mutually expand  all of us together, all of us together.  you see that one layer higher, it's not just the united states.  it's everyone and i mention this because that is what is  happening in the world today okay, have you noticed what's happening.  droggy says we are going to do qe  but  [unknown]  says we are going to do qe.  [sound]  , okay?  the bank of england has already been doing this.  switzerland has already been doing this.  bank of japan yesterday, on the fte, was talking about this.  there are only five central banks that matter, okay?  and those are the five. and they have, they're all.  i don't know whether they met in a room like.  the new york bankers and agreed to this but their acting in concert.  whether, whether they are doing this on  purpose in a, in a formal agreement or not.  okay?  they're all expanding at the same time,  so there's not going to be any external drain.  there is no external.  there's, the martians are not yet doing business with us, okay?  once these five central banks are in cahoots about this, and are expanding.  that's the whole, the whole world monetary system is expanding.  and that's what's going on  right now. this is pretty incredible.  this is pretty incredible, i don't know what they  worry about, but they must be worry about something.  that this is this is a pretty big move to  co-ordinate that kind of, that kind of action they are  acting just, so you see one layer up, this is  the point one layer up world is a whole, okay?  and they're operating, jointly to expand their balance sheet.  they're doing what the imf  basically can't do. right?  the imf has to get all of it's members  to agree, in order to expand the outstanding sdrs.  okay?  and you never can get that, because the  us will never say yes, or something like that.  but the central bank's the c5, okay, they can  do this by themselves, privately, as a private arrangement.  leaving the whole rest of the world, out of this plan.  just like the new york city bankers.  so, expect there to be complaints about this.  okay.  in the rest of the world.  that somehow, the, the big central banks. okay, the central, central banks.  are taking care of each other.  okay. and not us.  okay.  there's going to be, there's going to be, complaints about that.  so, watch, watch the ft pages.  that's where they'll be.  
i want to close out now by talking about the least important part of this lecture.  okay.  which is the, which is the reserve requirement.  okay.  which you'll read about in stegun.  there's all this discussion of the reserve requirement.  and the the necessity of banks having to, having to make sure not that they  meet the clearing at the end of the  day, but they're these two week maintenance periods.  and you have  to have an average quantity of a certain quantity  reserves by the end of that two week period.  so there, there's sort of two things you're maximizing.  you're making sure that you can meet, meet the clearing today but that's not so  hard, you can always do that by borrowing and lending in the fed funds market.  but you also have to make sure that you're actually holding  reserves positions of a certain average amount over, over this period.  and that is sort of gaming and makings sure that you're,  you're just hitting that target and not over and, this  was an attempt she has an extremely interesting discussion, which is  now just of historical interest i suppose, of the attempt  during the monetarist phase of, of, of the fed under vulgar.  monetarists said, we want to make sure that we have used  these, used these reserve requirements to control the money supply.  okay.  if you have to, if you have accumulate these  reserves, this prevents you from expanding your balance sheet.  see this. okay.  these deposits incur required reserves. okay.  and if the, if the city bank is worried about not  having enough reserves, or if there aren't enough reserves in the system.  the idea is that it limits the expansion  of money and also limits the expansion of credit,  at least bank credit, okay, in this way. that was the idea.  there had been before, what was  called lagged reserve accounting.  which meant that banks had to accumulate reserves that were  [cough]  sufficient to be a certain proportion of the deposits that they had two weeks ago.  okay.  so, you could make this loan without the reserves needed to back it.  everything is fine, and then two weeks later, you've got to find the reserves.  well, clearly in that environment, the fed has to supply the reserves.  okay.  by, because otherwise somebody is not going to meet there reserve  requirement, it's not going to all add up. these deposits are already there.  they already been created two weeks ago, okay.  there's no, so the fed has to provide the reserve.  [cough]  it can provide the, using this sort of mechanism here.  okay.  and the monitors were concerned about that.  they said the fed isn't really controlling the money supply, it's just really,  the demand is expanding and the fed is just expanding to meet that.  so we want to have more discipline. okay?  it's all about discipline versus elasticity.  and the way we're going to have, we're  going to achieve that is with contemporaneous reserve accounting.  ' kay, by saying the amount of reserves  you have to hold during this two week period,  ha, has to do with the average deposit  accounts you've had during this same two week period.  okay?  so you can image, this is a little tougher to hit this thing, because  the quantity of deposits is fluctuating around,  the quantity of reserves is fluctuating around.  it led to a lot of chaos in fed funds market, actually.  and, and so, they abandoned it. okay.  but it was tried for awhile.  it was tried, the important thing to understand  about this sort of intellectually, is this was  an attempt to create some discipline in a  system that people felt had run out of control.  you know, this was the period of, of, of double digit inflation.  and the thought was how, maybe we can use contemporary  instrument, contemporaneous reserve accounting to  put some control on this system.  okay? turned out it didn't really work.  she's pretty clear about that.  okay?  there's still arguments among, among academics about this but  there, it hasn't been tried, it hasn't been tried again.  and now, you know, this is all a dead letter, because there's so many reserves.  okay?  that this just no, the notion that you have  to hold a certain amount of reserves against your deposits.  you know, there's trillions of reserves.  it's not a problem.  it's not a problem, but the fed funds  market still exists, and it exists for these  payment purposes.  the, to, to satisfy the payment purposes at the end of the day.  the question is, don't i think that the reserve requirement is going to  become relevant again at some future date after we're out of this crisis?  and i guess i have two two answers to that.  there, there was more to the question than that, but that was the essence of it.  first of all, we're in the crisis and it's going to take a while.  there's a trillion dollars worth of excess reserves out  there that's not going to go away in a minute.  but, but that wasn't your question, so look, look through that.  the deeper question is, was the reserve requirement ever kind of important?  okay?  and i think this is an important question, and, and,  and one that we're going to be grappling with in this course.  you know, does the quantity  of reserves in any, in any significant way restrict  the expansion of credit or the expansion of money?  because what we're going to see is that  there's a parallel banking system, the shadow  banking system, which can create, pretty close  substitutes for all this stuff, and credit.  okay.  that doesn't face any reserve requirement, that doesn't face any capital  requirement, that can be offshore, it can be anywhere in the world.  okay.  and marginal  credit can flow through that.  so, there's an institutional example where it's  not clear that even if reserve requirements  buying for banks, does that mean that  that controls credit or controls the money supply?  i mean, you can, you can crank up buying on banks.  that's where we started.  right? with this article here.  that european capital requirements are trying to make banks safer.  and so, what it's doing is making sure that  banks are not a source of credit. okay.  in europe.  that doesn't mean there is no source of credit in europe.  it just means that it's not going to be banks, it's going to be something else.  okay?  so, i think in general that's true about monetary systems.  that if you put restrictions on one thing, you can control one thing.  but is that the thing, does that do anything to a larger economy.  [cough]  was is just like you know, a balloon, you punch  it here and it, it blows out, it blows out there.  [cough]  there are, this is a real question, it's a real debate.  i tend to be you can probably hear, on the side of  people who say, but, that, that, that mostly, these are ineffective constraints.  the reserve constraint is, is an ineffective  constraint in modern, in modern financial markets.  it probably wasn't in 1950 when it was  invented, and all the text books were written.  okay?  because there weren't any alternatives, and you could  really things really tightly with that.  i think it's not really true with that effect about, about the world.  that doesn't mean there is nothing you can do.  that doesn't mean there is no way to control.  it's just that's not a very effective measure.  
but we're not living in typical times pretty clearly.  this pattern is not obtaining anymore, right now.  this article in reuters that was talking, was trying  to explain why repo, repo rates are so high.  that it was, it was saying it had something to do with dealer  balance sheets and the distortion of  their inventories, they're holding all these bills.  in that article they also said, that over the, since january,  the repo rate has been moving in a, in a band.  between about 16 basis points and about 30, okay?  so in other words, it's always been about the fed funds effective, okay?  but sometimes not very much above, and sometimes a lot more above.  so now let's just apply the same logic that i gave before, the  [unknown]  logic, okay? what does this mean?  what does it mean for the market rate to be higher than the official rate?  what it means is that the fed is trying to be very elastic.  it, they, it feels there's too much disciple in the market.  the market rate of interest is too high. it's trying to suck it down.  it's trying to, it's trying to pull it, pull it  down by its operations, by pegging fed funds rate down.  pegging the fed funds rate  below the repo rate means that there's an arbitrage, okay?  banks can go, can borrow in the fed funds  market and then lend in the repo market, okay?  and there's, there's a nice, nice little 15 point, 15  basis point pickup that you can get for doing that.  and the repo market is the market where everyone is, all credit is, right?  only, only banks are in the fed funds market.  well that's not entirely true, but it's narrower anyway.  anyone can be, so they are trying, desperately to keep, the,  the, bank rate below, below the market rate to encourage this expansion.  in order to, in order to facilitate, the recovery of economy.  the fact that, even though they've tried so hard, the repo rate stays above the fed  funds rate, is to me, a little worrisome. that it says there's problems out there.  there's people out there who are, who need liquidity and they're bidding for it.  and they keep bidding for it and that's what keeping the  repo rate high, it's keeping, that's the market they can participate in.  it's, and, so that even though there is this incentive, you know,  to, to, to borrow in the fed funds market and then lend  on in the repo market.  it's not enough to satisfy the liquidity needs of,  of, in, in, in the dollar funding markets, okay?  the dollar funding markets are under stressed.  this behavior of the repo rate over the last six months is the thing  that the fed would have been watching in thinking should we do another qe.  you know we, we're, we're keeping the fed funds rate low is it having any effect?  okay, and apparently they came to feel not enough.  we need to do something more dramatic and that's what they're doing now.  they're going and they're directly, buy  mortgage bank securities in order, and, and  doing, doing this sort of thing, not with a repo loan, not temporary, okay?  but  [sound]  $40 billion a month  here, like this. so they're directly injecting reserves  into the system here and, and and, and pushing on that as hard as they can.  will it work?  that takes us back to what ft was saying today.  john maynard keynes, used to talk about the limits of monetary policy.  that it's a lot better at slowing down the economy, then speeding up the economy.  he called expansionary monetary policy he sometimes  spoke of it as pushing on a string.  so it's like there is string between you and me and if i tug  on that string, i can pull you with me, okay?  but if i push on that string  [laugh],  the string just collapses on to the floor. it doesn't push you it's not a  rod it's not a rigid rod pushing you, and so this is pushing on the string.  okay, their, their trying, their trying but it's,  it's it's a lot a push for, for not much, not much movement.  and so, i think that, that shows. so, so, so let me just recap there.  this style of analysis that you've just, you've just watched me do, okay?  is, is typical, in, of what you'll see in this class too.  which is looking at patterns of interest rates, looking at  patterns of also quantities and balance sheets and then asking yourself.  what does that tell you must be happening behind the scenes.  these are clues, these are detective  clues for where are there strains in the system, how much strains are there.  you know, when the financial crisis was happening in,  in the fall of 2007 you know, the spread of  [unknown]  over the fed funds rate went to 100 basis points.  never seen that in 15 years of teaching money and banking, okay?  but for somebody who knows about the euro  dollar market, and knows about the fed funds market.  you start to say, well, what must be happening then  is europe and you, you, it, it tells you something.  it tells you something about the world watching these prices.  about where the strains are, and who's in trouble.  and so when i see anomalous price structures  like this, i mean, i don't trade these markets.  i don't read, read the paper necessarily every day, so it was really only  monday that i noticed geez the repo rate is really way out of whack, okay?  so i had to spend two days figuring that out.  and saying what's that all about?  you know, what could possibly be behind that?  i don't know.  we're going to find out. you know, history will  tell us we'll find out what the fed was reacting to  or when people publish their balance sheets, you'll, you'll find out, okay?  but what you can see always, every day are the prices.  the prices are quoted every day, and they're visible things.  so, you don't, you, and the spreads are the key.  you know, the spreads between these prices is where all the information is.  looking just at the level  of interest rates you know, as your,  as your intermediate macro textbook does, right?  there's one interest rate, right?  they mean they're really sure whether it's a  long-term interest rate or short-term interest rate usually, okay?  but there's, there's one interest rate there and, and, and  this all the other interest rate they all moved together.  well, they kind of do, you know, they kind of do, that's right.  but, you know, 15 basis points seems a  tiny little number, but usually that relationship is the  other way around, okay?  and, and when, when spreads reverse, the incentives are exactly opposite  of what they were when, when they were the other way around.  so the flow's reversed, the, the, it's, this is big  information even though it's only tiny little numbers watching these spreads.  and there are other spreads like this too.  that we'll be talking about in the, i, i, in this course.  and that's what makes reading the ft  a constant excitement.  it's like another page in, in that thriller you're reading.  like another clue you get about who done it.  and where it's being done and to whom it's being done.  and that's part of my excitement, every, everyday in teaching this class too.  so, i've just put in real time, my notion of what's happening in the world.  based entirely on what i've just read in the ft and these prices.  i have no secret information, about anything, so now we will see.  we will see what happens in the next, in the next few  months, and see if this proves to be insightful or just wrong.  and then we'll get some more information and we'll form another hypothesis.  
have shown how two important derivative contracts can  really be understood behind the scenes as swaps of  iou, and that helps you explain even why the  price is what it is, by thinking about that.  this is the interest rate you can lock  in today for three-month lending, two months from now.  okay, so you might think that  the forward rate for this period is equal to the expected  spot rate for the same period, okay? we don't know what that's going to be.  you know.  it's, two months from now, libor, three month libor will be determined.  this is three month libor.  two months from now, we don't know what it is.  okay?  you might think that the, that the lot,  the rate that you could lock, lock-in today,  would be some kind of unbiased expectation of the future rate.  okay.  that's the expectations of hypothesis of the term structure, is what that is, okay.  question mark, is it true?  it is not true, okay. it is not true.  this fails all the time empiraclly. why, why?  we're going to come back to that. in later lectures.  over here.  look at that f 6.  this is the exchange rate six months from now that you can lock in today.  wouldn't you think that f 6 is equal to the spot rate six months from now,  the expected spot rate.  six months from now wouldn't you think that seems like it should, 'kay.  that condition is called uncovered interest parity  and this also does not hold empirically.  all of these things the failure of uncovered  interest parity and the failure of the term structure.  theory of, of exertations theory of the term structure  are puzzles for economics.  you would kind of think this sort of should be true.  why isn't it true?  we're going to talk later on, and i'm going to suggest it  actually has to do with the hierarchy of money and credit.  it has to do with liquidity, it has to do with the, the,  that payments today are actually worth more than promised payments in the future.  and not just in the sense of time preference.  okay? and that that's true in a foreign  exchange market as well as the term structure.  but we've got to build some more apparatus first.  okay?  that the reason these things fail, these completely reasonable  things fail has to do with something really deep.  in money and banking.  
image i like to have in mind because we are in new york  here is the lady liberty image, scales right, scales.  so let's see if i can draw some scales here.  okay, where we have one pan here.  [sound].  okay? cash flow pan, okay?  and we have another pan here or bucket here.  and this is the cash commitment pan.  [sound].  okay?  and then the balance between these is an arrow.  and this is, the scale here, okay, is the interest rate.  the money market interest rate.  [sound].  okay?  that the balance between the pattern of cash flows and the pattern  of cash commitments is what is determining the short term interest rate.  at any moment in time.  now the fed is doing something to and  you know, it's a more complicated story than that.  but behind the scenes, there's some actual facts about  the world and those facts are balance sheet facts.  those facts are promises to pay at a certain point in the future.  that are either lined up with the actual prospects of the firm.  the person who made the promise.  or they are not lined up with the, with the actual prospects of the firm.  the person that made the promise.  if they're not lined up, that person has to do something.  they have to do something. this is the point.  it's not about preference.  it's about being forced to do something by the promises you've made in the past.  optimistic you know, whatever, sure.  that's what makes them, that's what makes horse races.  people say it's going to be, i have such a great idea or i really am going to  buy this house and it's, we're going to have  a wonderful life together and then you lose your job.  you know?  so the cash flows go away, but the cash commitments stay, okay?  and now you're in trouble. and, so.  the balance between cash flows and cash  commitments is true for each individual, okay?  a stressed individual or not.  but it's also true for the economy as a whole, the pattern.  okay?  in a world in which most people have cash flows adequate  to meet their cash commitments, you're not going to have a financial crisis.  in a world in which there's a lot of people, who have cash flows  that are inadequate to meet their cash  commitments, you're going to have a financial crisis.  it just becomes more and more fragile.  this is the minsky point.  fragility has to do with the balance of cash  commitments, promises to pay, relative to the actual cash flows  that are emerging from your activities, from your sale of  labor, from your business profits, from your sale of goods.  and in a crisis, the crisis shows up in the money market,  rate of interest. and so, we watch the money market.  the money market is our detector, our crisis detector, our stress detector.  okay, watch the money market and what you will see is a price popping around.  okay, and what's causing that to, that price to pop around, is  the shifting balance between the pattern of cash flows and cash commitments.  so this  is a sufficient statistic, sufficient statistic in the money  market for the state of the macro economic balance.  that's the idea.  you're much more used to thinking of stocks, than upflows.  it's not so easy to think about flows, it takes practice, okay.  so let me just link this up.  i had said financial assets, financial liabilities, and money.  when you think about your t accounts.  okay, assets and liabilities. financial assets are here.  money are here. financial liabilities are here and  then, and then there is net worth as a balancing item here and  net worth is all about solvency. net worth is what we mean by solvency.  these are stocks meaning, and what are financial assets?  financial assets are the accumulation of all the past flows.  you know, we've bough  this asset, we bought that asset, we bought the other asset.  all of those assets now we own, that's the stock of assets.  that's there.  similiarly, hoarding.  we hoarded a little bit, we hoarded a little bit more,  [unknown]  and so the total stock of money we have is the reserves that are sitting here.  okay, similarly with financial liabilities.  we borrowed a little bit, we borrowed some more, okay.  this is the accumulated borrowing over the past up until the present.  all of these stocks, okay, are residues of past flows.  they're what's left, okay. and they also have time patterns  looking forward.  their promises to pay the liabilities have dates on them.  right.  certain dates when you have to make payments.  the assets have dates on them.  certain dates when you going to get payments.  okay.  that's what i am showing. here.  these dates.  the flows.  so, the financial assets here, are like adding all this stuff up.  discounted present value, you know that.  so it's like 40, okay?  and the total liabilities, adding all this stuff up, it's 20.  what i'm showing you, these examples here, are meant to show you a  case of a firm, or an entity, that has exactly the same financial assets.  total stock.  exactly the same financial liabilities, total stock but  very different prospects because of the time patterns.  okay?  that liquidity matters.  okay? not just solvency, liquidity matters.  if you look at the balance sheet what you see is solvency, you  need to look behind that at the time patterns in order to see.  the fragility that is building, that is building up.  okay.  so, that's the lesson for today.  [blank_audio]  