hello. time for the fun to begin. and i'm going to start with what, what i think is a really kind of interesting story. it's a story about the relation of this concept we have of a soul to who we are, and how our views of that have changed over time, thanks largely to the combined contributions of philosophy and biology. so, let's get right into it. i've titled this lecture psychology emerges from the shadow of the soul, nice imagery there. and i want to start, well, actually, i'm not exactly sure where this starts. because for literally centuries and centuries, humans have always perceived themselves as special in some way. distinct from everything else in the world around us. i think this is captured really well in a, in a song from the police, where, where the chorus says, we are spirits in a material world. the idea there, the concept is that, sure, we live in this world where everything around us is, is perceived as physical, as material. but we are something else. we have a spiritual element to us that makes us distinct. now, this distinction is really relevant in the scientific context for the following reason. things that are physical, things that are material, we assume that the interactions, the behaviors those things show must follow what we call natural laws. and in fact, science is the pursuit of those natural laws. the idea that through careful observation and systematic manipulation, we can figure out what those laws are. things like gravity, you know, and, and various other laws. and that in so doing, we'll gain a really good understanding of this physical world around us. and so, we studied physics, we studied chemistry, we studied biology astronomy, etc. all of those are studies of the physical world around us. but, of course, if we do not perceive ourselves as physical beings, if we perceive ourselves as spiritual beings, then what we're implying there is that our behavior does not follow such constrained natural laws. and if it doesn't, well then, it doesn't makes sense to study it scientifically. so really, psychology would never be born unless we started to think of ourselves in different ways and that process really began with rene descartes and here's a story of rene descartes that i really like. the idea is that he was walking through a park in, in, in france, and as a typical french park, it had statues and it had flowers. up ahead he saw a statue of, of diana, goddess of the hunt, beautiful statue. so, he started to approach to get a better look at her, but as he came closer out from behind the bushes came neptune, barring a trident and blocking his path. a statue of neptune, i should say, and that's what was, you know, really so impressive, the statue moved as if with intention. now, how did it move? well, this was the time when hydraulics was just being understood and used. and so, literally, rene descartes had stepped on a pressure plate which forced some sort of liquid through a tube and ultimately that force was used to move the statue on some relatively, relatively frictionless set of, you know, rails or something like that. that's how the motion actually happened. but in rene's mind, it was a really profound experience for the following reason. he knew that statue was inanimate, he knew it was made of material, you know, physical material, and yet it behaved as though it was alive. that is, it was animate and had intentions. it looked like the statue was trying to block his path. so, rene suddenly started looking at other things, like animals and humans, and asking whether maybe their behavior was analogous to that statue. maybe they you really were physical beings as well and may be their behavior did reflect something like hydro, hydraulics, some physical process that made them look animate. ultimately, rene concluded that that once the case for animals, he felt they were fully machine-like, fully mechanical. but humans, he thought were a little different. humans, he thought, had a dual nature. and we now call this notion, cartesian dualism. so, he thought, yes, humans are partly machine. and sometimes, their behavior is reflecting that mechanistic side of them, but he thought humans also had a soul. and that soul could, at times, control the body. much like a, a marionette controller, you know, a puppeteer. the puppet is moving, the puppet is acting, but it's actually the puppeteer who's moving the strings and causing the action. so, rene thought we do possess a soul and that soul can intervene and take control of this machine, or it can kind of sit back and let the machine do its own thing. so, this dual nature, cartesian dualism. as philosophers considered this idea, some of them went a little bit more radical. and i'll, i'll ask you to kind of look at the dates now. rene descartes, he's around 1600s. so now, let's go to john locke, late 1600s. so, john locke started to push the idea that maybe even the mind, the human mind, maybe it was even mechanical, physical and therefore, maybe it was subject to natural laws that could be studied scientifically. now, this notion was given a name by james mill, you know, into the 1800s now. james mill called this idea materialism, the idea that we are material beings. so, material beings in a material world. and therefore if we are completely material, if there is no soul whatsoever, then everything, all human behavior, reflects material interactions that should be governed by natural laws that could be studied, okay? so, that's a, that cognitive shift really opens the door for psychological investigation. now, before i go too much further, let me just say i have a link to a short video here that explains this notion of cartesian dualism in, in a little bit more detail and, and it shows you some pretty pictures along the way. so, check that out and then come around right back. okay, welcome back. philosophy is all well and good, but philosophy is about ideas. how do you know which ideas are right? well, philosophy itself had an answer to that question. and the answer was something they called empiricism. empiricism is the notion of conducting experiments that demonstrate clearly what is and what isn't true. and when it comes to this notion of, of humans as potentially being materialistic beings i want to highlight two sorts of experimentation. so, first let's start with luigi galvani. luigi galvani, a very interesting guy did a lot of research on frog legs or he eventually, at least, did. it was kind of happenstancial, he happened to have, i don't know why, he happened to have dismembered frogs on, on a table where static seemed to cause a leg to move. and he was intrigued by this, and he ultimately created a scientific experiment. so, that's kind of of shown in this panel on the right. these things that you're seeing are depictions of frog legs and, you know, what luigi would stress when he did his demonstration is, there is no soul in these frog legs. maybe, depending on your belief system, you might believe that once upon a time, a soul did inhabit this frog's body. but if that soul was there, it ain't there now. at some point, when this frog became dismembered, the soul left the body. and clearly, what we have left here is just biological matter, material matter. but what luigi shows is if you apply a current, so imagine, this is a frog leg, if you apply an electrical current to the muscle, you will see that frog leg retract. and if you let that current go, it will kick it. so, by applying or not an electrical current, you can literally make that leg dance. you can make it look animate, you can make it move, as though it were full of life. there's a short little video, very short, but let's just do it for fun to give you a sense. here, we have our frog legs, applies a current to one place and ground to another, you see the frog leg kick, okay? nothing too profound there, but that gives you the idea and luigi would go around showing this demonstration. it was very powerful. it showed people in a very clear way that the body at least seems to be a mechanical kind of device, not a hydraulic, more electric in what we will now call electrical, electrochemical. but clearly there was a machine like nature to it. okay, fine. it's a frog. rene descartes said frogs were immaterial. why should we be impressed? why should we accept that what's true of the frog is true of the human? and that's where i want to highlight the work of paul broca. let me translate this for, for, for those of you who are not chinese. this says, broca's area, this says wernicke's area and it's pointing to var, various subsections of the brain. so, let, let me give you the backstory of this. paul broca and, and notice now, we are into the 1800s. paul broca was a medical doctor and he would visit many different institutions and one thing he noticed was that, he came across these patients, in different places that seemed to have a very similar and interesting symptomatology. so, specifically, they would follow instructions well. if you, you said something to one of these patients like, hey, can you go get that glass of water on the table over there and bring it to me, they would do exactly that. they clearly understood language. but when they tried to speak to you, they couldn't form comprehensible sentences. their language was all jumbled. they could perceive speech but they couldn't produce it. paul found this really fascinating and he did what had to be a kind of an odd thing for the time. he asked these patients for their permission for the following. when you die, i would like to cut your skull open and remove and examine your brain. kind of a crazy idea, but a number of patients agreed to this. said, okay, sure. well, i guess they didn't actually say, okay, because they had problems speaking. but they had some way of indicating that they were okay with this. and now, paul being a very, very patient scientist, waited. [laugh] and he waited till they died. when they died, he removed their brain and looked at it, and tumor patient, everyone of them had damage in this area. this are we now call broca's area. in fact, since broca's work another patient group was was discovered as sort of opposite patient group who had problems understanding language but could produce it perfectly fine. when you look at their brains, they all have damage over here, in area we now call, wernicke's area. now, these results are critical because they seem to show that the brain itself is kind of put together like a machine. distinct parts of the brain seem to have distinct functions, a notion that we call localism in the brain. local parts of the brain do very specific things. that is true of machines. you know, the steering wheel does a very specific thing in a car. the acceleration pedal does a very specific thing. so, the brain kind of looks like that. and it looks like that even with respect to something like language, which we consider a very high level ability, a human ability, shall we say and even then, it looks mechanistic. so, the results of broca really seem to go along with this, this philosophical move towards a materialistic view of humans. by the way, this was also the time, i have frankenstein over here. because i think it's kind of interesting to know, mary shelley's frankenstein, that book, was written at about this time. and really, the fact that it's written about this time is a reflection of the time. this was a time when doctors, physicians, scientists, started to think of the human body and the human mind as a machine, something like frankenstein, that you could maybe even put together with spare parts. and think luigi galvani now. if you have a bolt of electricity, that might animate this machine and bring it to life. and maybe that's all there is to a machine. now, frankenstein wasn't, you know, a real success as a human. but he does embody, quite honestly, that concept, that the human condition maybe a purely physical, purely material condition. and if that's true, then we can assume that human behavior must reflect natural laws and that put it squarely into the, into the realm of science. it suddenly becomes human behavior, suddenly becomes something we can study scientifically. that's what we'll turn to next. thank you for your attention. i hope you enjoyed the story. until next time.
alright, so what we are going to be doing in the next 3 lectures is pretty briskly going through the history of psychology and i really have a couple of goals in doing this. one of which is to really show you the tension that psychology has in terms of it's scientific merit to be quite honest with you. and, and how that tension has actually led to in a sense, psychology having what we could think of as multiple personalities. there's, there's kind of two distinct approaches within the field of psychology so i want to highlight that, the sort of clinical approach and then the more traditional, basic research scientific approach. and i want to use the history to do that, and specifically i'm going to want to use sigmund freud becuase i really see sigmund freud as critical in terms of creating this multiple personalities as it were. so, the next 3 lectures are therefore, split into the history of psychology before freud, then a discussion of freud himself and the impact he had and then finally a discussion of psychology after freud that will bring us in a good position to talk about current psychological findings. alright so let's just, let's jump in. alright, psychology before freud. well i want to begin here by just giving you the context in which psychology was born, because i think, you know that's an interesting part of the story as well. psychology was born in germany, and a lot of the names we're going to be talking about today are, are german names. the first psychologist were german. and the reason for that is because we're going to be talking about a period in the late 1800s. and this is a period when germany was economically a very, very strong country. okay, they were, they were the strongest country in europe. and in fact, in a sense, in the world and like many countries who are experiencing a really strong economic time, they decided to reinvest some of their money into research to kind of stay at the leading edge. to give their people the best quality of life, but also to be leading the world in issues like health care, of course military design. anything that they thought would keep germany at the forefront and so they were really willing to consider other approaches to research, and new topics, and new subjects, and that was really, really important. adding to this were a couple of players at the time who didn't call themselves psychologists. so the first one for example, hermann von helmholtz was actually a a physicist. he called himself an empirical philosopher, which is coming pretty close to psychology. but he was also an ophthalmologist and he had major contributions in all of these fields. what he did for psychology was to really show that some of the issues related to the machinery of the mind issues that previously people, though you could not study scientifically. he showed that if you're clever, you actually can do this and i want to, i want to demonstrate his approach with a, a more general example of 1 of the issues helmholtz was very interested in. and, and that's the speed with which neural tissue transmits information, okay? neural transmission rates. now, previous to helmholtz, people assumed that neural transmission happens so fast that it's immeasurable. you just could not scientifically study it. but helmholtz came up with a bunch of different techniques. so, he did a bunch of animal research and other things, but i want to highlight a logical approach that he took and i'm going to highlight it with this example. so, imagine we had helmholtz's problem. we wanted to know how fast a neuro signal could move from this lady's left hand up to her brain and then to her right hand. so specifically, imagine we said, okay we're going to squeeze your left hand and when we squeeze your left hand we want you, as quickly as possible, to squeeze your right hand once you feel that. so the signal has to go to her brain, she feels it, and then she has to send the signal down to her other hand to squeeze. how fast can that happen? well if you try to do this with a single individual, the measurement that the timing apparatuses they had in heimholtz's day simply couldn't record speeds that fast. but imagine the following, imagine you're on a set of roller skates, and we find 1000 people and we line them up. and we just give them this simple task. we say, okay, here's what's going to happen, i'm going to squeeze this gentleman's left hand. and when i squeeze his left hand, i will start my stopwatch. and then, off i'm going to go on my roller skates [sound], down this hill. and we've, we've cleverly positioned ourselves on a hill so we can go really fast. so we go scooting around this hill round to the other side, pass a thousand people and then we go to the last person in line and we hold their right hand, and we wait for them to squeeze our hand, and they squeeze our hand we stop the stop watch, okay? now what we've done is taking this really fast thing but by multiplying it by 1000, having it have to go across 100 people, we made it much slower, we made it measurable. and what helmholtz found is if you just took the total time, and then you figure out okay what's the average distance of neural tissue, in the average human being which you can measure, easily enough. so if we now divide that total time by the average amount of neural tissue multiply by a 1000 because we had a 1000 humans. we can derive a time and helmholtz did this. his time was about 25 to 38 meters per second. again, a little rough, but hey, he could measure it. and that was the really important point. these nerve cells are the machinery that the brain is using to communicate with the body. and helmholtz showed you could measure and study them scientifically, very important. in the same vein, but perhaps even more important is the contribution of ernst weber. again, mid 1800s is probably when weber is doing his best work. weber like the following kind of procedure. he would present stimuli, he would present two participants two different stimuli at a time. imagine two lines and give them very simple tasks, which line is longer? it could also be which sound is louder? which light is brighter? it could be which touch feels like it has a little more pressure to it. he studied all sorts of sensory stimuli, and he found this really fascinating truth, or law, i guess you would call it. which went as follows, he was interested in how different you had to make, for example, the lengths of a line before people could see the difference. the first thing he found out is that our sensory stimuli have limits. okay, we can't take one line and just add a little tiny bit to it, and people go, oh, there it is. you have to add a fair amount before they notice that the two lines are different. how much do you have to add? well, weber called that amount something he called the just noticeable difference, or jnd. that was how much extra length you had to add before people could tell a difference. or how much extra sound, you know, loudness, how much extra brightness, et cetera. and what he found is that, that amount, how big that amount was, depended on the original length of the line. or the original, more general terms, the intensity of the stimulus. let's look at this formula. he said, if you had some original intensity and you ask, how much of a change do you have to make to that before people notice it. there seems to be this constant ratio, let me explain that. let's say this was a 10mm line, and we kept making this one bigger until people suddenly said, okay, i can, i can now perceive in my mind, i can see those are different. and let's say we had to add two millimeters to do that, so they could tell the different between a 10 milliliter line and a 12 milliliter line, okay? so we found 2 or 20% extra then they could see it. what if this was now 100 millimeter line? well if you're presented 100 millimeter and 102 millimeters, they still couldn't see the difference. so it's not a question that we can detect a 2 millimeter difference. rather, you had to keep increasing this until you got to 120 millimeters, that is 20% more than the original size. so when you got to 120, now people could see them. so he found these what we now call weber fractions, these ratios that hold true for our different sensory systems. and the really important point of all this for psychology, is that he was actually studying people's mental perceptions. he called, what he was doing psycho physics, studying the physics of the mind. and what he showed is that, hey you know what? math seems to work, we can apply math. there are things like constants to perception. and again, that suddenly, in this environment where people were willing to explore new research methods, these sorts of findings suggested, you know what? the mind is open for study. we can have a science of the mind, so they really opened the door. now, who walked through the door? well that's wilhelm wundt. wilhelm wundt is credited as being the first psychologist. that's on two bases, really. he established the first experimental lab devoted to psychology in 1874. and he wrote the first textbook, over here, the principles of physiological psychology, in 1879. so those two things give him the title, the first person to, to really call himself a psychologist and the father of modern psychology. now from it's birthday, psychology started to have this battle in terms of science. so specifically, wundt really favored a procedure that he called introspection. introspection literally means you know, inspection to inspection, something to inspect inward, to kind of inspect the contents of your consciousness. this is what wundt did and this is what he trained people to, he has so-called trained observers that he would teach. the proper way to kind of both look into their mind and to report what was going on in there. and so he would train these observers quite heavily and then he would present various stimulants. they could be just colors or sounds or, you know, anything really and these people would have to tell wundt what they were seeing in their mind or what they were hearing or, you know, anything that was going on in their conscience mind. and what wundt was really after it's, it's now what we call structuralism was that idea of what conscience experience looks like. what, what, what's the structure of conscious experience? now, a lot of scientists didn't like introspection. they thought this was problematic, because wundt was no longer directly studying the thing he was interested in, the structure of conscious experience. he required his trained observers to look for him and accurately report what was going on in their mind. and a lot of people questioned whether anybody could really do that. and whether things like, you know, making it verbal changed the whole experience. and so suddenly, there was this little controversy over the techniques wundt was using and how scientific they were and that was kind of going on, and yet wundt still continued on and found a lot of interesting things. however, then something happen. one of these transformational figures, darwin. of course, darwin transformed all of science what he did to psychology parallels what he did to biology. here's what i mean by that, when darwin was on the beagle, he was collecting specimens from exotic places. this is what a lot of biologists did during darwin's time. he was collecting all these specimins and then he was behaving in the typical biological way. in that, he was bringing the specimens back, and then he was trying to put them into taxonomic categories. so you know, we think of things like birds versus reptiles, that kind of thing. how did those categories come to exist? well biologists would look at the features that some specimen had. then they would group different specimens according to their features, and ultimately create some class around that. now that's all well and good, but darwin made another mental leap. he said, you know what, we're focusing too much on what the features are and classifying that in that way, but there's a whole other interesting, more interesting story to this. and that is we should be asking why the features are the way they are? so of course in his famous work he focused on finches that he found in the galapagos and he made a big deal out of things like their beak shape. so he noticed that, for example, some finches like this one, had sort of short stout strong beaks. other finches, had much longer, thinner beaks. the longer, thinner beaked finches, tended to live in places where, there were insects, within wooden logs, or other places where the bird had to get in to get those insects. so the long beak helped them get the food. other finches like this one with the shorter beak tended to live in places there was lots of seeds or nuts. so these beaks helped them crack the seeds or nuts. so, the feature of what the beak looks like is not just coincidental, it's not just random. it's very much tied into the context that the animal lives, and it has a very distinct function. and so darwin's essentially told the biological community, don't worry so much about what things look like, worry about what they're good for. what's the function? that's the real interesting story, that mentality came into psychology. i told you that vout was very interested in the structure of conscious experience, while following darwin and heavily influenced by him, william james you know, now we're seeing psychology broaden out of germany and coming into america here. william james, was interested in the function of various psychological processes. so he changed the whole dialogue away from what does conscious experience look like. and instead, you know, he's, he's a fascinating guy, william james. he would essentially, this is my image of him, you know, he would experience life, sit in a chair, reflect on things like. how does memory work, and what's it good for? and what about attention, you know, what does that do for us? and conscious experience and will. you know, what is the human will? do we actually control our own behavior? so he would think about all these deep issues. and you would come to these theoretical stances on them. the really creepy thing, i think it is creepy, is how accurate the guy was. in the fact, that william james himself, did not do a lot of empirical research. he mostly generated ideas, in some ways, he was more of a philosopher than a psychologist. but all of his psychology was about cognitive things, so he came up with all these ideas. years later, we're doing all of these experiments, and it really is uncanny how much our experimental data seems to match a lot of james' ideas. so he's a fascinating guy and i'll include a link to the principles of psychology, the full text which is his text book in 1890. and it's kind of interesting to look through that, and it's not coincidental here that you see it right beside darwin's origin of the species. you know that's really, these two do go hand in hand. so, he really changed the direction of psychology towards this functionalist mentality. alright, so that's where we are going to leave the story for now, except i really want to emphasize the following. up until now, psychology has been a very young science, trying hard to be scientific and trying to really you know promote, we can't scientifically study the mind. keep that in mind and bring that with you, into the next lecture on freud, where you'll see freud messes things up totally. in the meantime, i've got a couple of videos, you could choose to watch here. the 3 minute history of psychology is just that, it's a real quick history that'll cover everything that we've been through long biography on darwin. darwin's just a critical figure, and i do have a link to the text of the principles of psychology. and i encourage you just check out a section or 2. wording is very victorian the style of writing, but just to get a sense of how, how james thinks, i, i think is worth the effort. all right, so i'm going to leave it there, i will see you on part two of history. thanks, bye-bye.
sigmund freud. of all the names in psychology, that's the one name i'm pretty sure you're already familiar with. in fact, i wouldn't be surprised if you talked about somebody making freudian slips, or if you described one of your friends as being "anal", or something like that. all of that is really the legacy of sigmund freud. sigmund freud is a fascinating character on many levels. what we're going to focus on now though is the influencing that freud had on the development of psychology as a discipline. freud will come back. he will be in this course off and on. especially as we get, you know, later towards the clinical and personality issues. but here, i want to give you a taste and again, really emphasize how freud changed psychology. alright. so, here we are, week one, lecture four: freud, the fork in the road. alright. so, i want to put this in a little bit of context. freud um[unknown] a lot of his ideas in the late 1800's, early 1900's, during what was called the victorian era. and during that era, the notion is that you know, men were gentlemen, women were ladies. there was a properness about how things were supposed to happen. and there were certain issues in two paramount among them. sex and aggresion that people just did not talk about. they were not polite. it's not the sort of things people discussed. and in this context comes this guy named sigmund freud telling this you know sort of dark story of man kind. so sigmund freud, these are just a few quotes but let's just focus on the underlying stuff. he talked about that humans are far more immoral than they can imagine, and that there's this you know, dark side of them on the third quote that approximates that of a psychotic. within us there's like this little psychotic and that if we look at somebody carefully we will see evidence of this, the betrayal oozes out of his every pore. so if somebody who's trained to analyze can see things about a person that that person not even know about themselves. and he describes this tendency to aggression and in fact to sexuality as being innate independent and an instinctual disposition in man. so he really describes humans as having this really dark side, you know. think of jekyll and hyde. this was the same time as the, the book jekyll and hyde was out. so he says humans have this dark side. it's inside of us but a lot of us aren't even aware. some of these aspects of ourselves. and so perhaps not surprisingly this fascinated many people in the victorian era. they couldn't help but be drawn to this very provocative notion of humanity. and then once they got there, freud had this really kind of complex story of how he thought. humanity worked and, and let's go to that story. so, he thought a lot of issues people had came about from psychic conflicts. i'll describe the virus part of that in just a moment. but let's go right to the little monster inside of a cell. forray thought there were three components to our psyche. one was the id, which in german just translates to the it. so within us is an it. this is a very primitive, primitive part of us. it has various drives you know, it wants all the biological drives met. so it wants food, it wants water, it wants comfort. but it also wants sex. and, in certain context it wants to behave aggressively. and it behaves according to what freud called the pleasure principle. that he thought the id, wanted to gratify these desires immediately. so the notion of immediate gratification. if i'm hungry, i want to get some food. if i'm thirsty i want to get something to drink. if i'm cold i want to put on a sweater. if i see somebody over there i'd really like to have sex with then the it within me wants to just go and do it. now we say primitive because perhaps this is how things happened in the primitive times. y'know perhaps primitive humans did just try to force themselves on whoever they wanted and did just have you know, aggressive acts on whoever they wanted, when they wanted. but freud thought there was this interesting interplay between that part of us and society. and the society part was largely represented by a part of our psyche he called the super-ego. the super ego is that part of us that wants to be the perfect us, 'kay? wants to be the kind of us that people like and respect. and so we, we want to be somebody that does things competently, does things well, has sort of leadership qualities. and that other people have come to like us and admire us. now obviously, if we're just going to go and, you know, force ourselves on everybody we'd like to have sex with, that's not going to get us liked, respected, or admired. you know, that, there's going to be a problem, there. and so there's conflict between these two - the primitive version of us, and then the version of us that society has made us endeavor to be. and so how do we resolve those conflicts? well that's where the ego comes in. the ego, the job of the ego is to try to find ways of satisfying the id without compromising the super-ego. not always an easy job. and freud talked about all these interesting ways in which. these conflicts could play out. so let me just give you one taste, just so you have a feeling for it. let's say you were raised very conservatively, in a culture that was very conservative, perhaps very religious. but you've heard about this thing out there in the real world, called pornography. and there is part of you, this part of you, the id part of you. that wants to see it, that wants to experience it. but there's another part of you, the superego part of you, that wants to be viewed as a correct, good, positive member of society. and this part of you knows that viewing pornography is not geenrally seen as virtuous, is not the kind of behavior that would get people to like or respect you. so how can you view pornography and yet not compromise this identity? well that's where the ego comes in and here's one potential solution. maybe you could become a crusader against pornography. if you're going to crusade against pornography, well you have to know your enemy. you have to get a sense of what, what is out there? if, if i'm going to talk about how evil pornography is, well i have to know what it is. so now i have a reason, a reason to view pornography, satisfying the id and yet justifying that in a very moral, outstanding way by saying, yeah, i'm only doing this so i can argue against it. which allows you to fit with your societal norms and be viewed in a positive light. okay so that's that's a complex way in which the ego might try to satisfy both. and freud thought you know all through our lives we're trying to kind of do these two things. and then often we can find. reasonable ways of satisfying those two things, but sometimes we can't. sometimes these things cause an inner conflict that gives rise to psychological problems. okay. and a lot of times, by the way, the real cause of these psychological problems are below our level of consciousness. so we don't even know about the conflict that's going on but it is going on and it is shaping our behavior. so, now let's bring this back into the discussion of psychology as it was growing. it was growing as a science. but what freud brought to psychology is a nonscientific perspective. specifically, he brought a medical perspective. so freud approached psychology as a doctor approaches disease. and what i mean by that is if you go to a doctor and imagine this little girl here is suffereing flu like symptioms so we see all the symptomolgy. you know, headaches, fever, maybe a stuffed sinus. maybe achy body, these are all symptoms. and to a doctor, yes, they're relevant and, yes, if you can alleviate them that's cool. but what you really want to do is figure out what's causing all this, because these are just reflections of some underlying cause. in the case of a flu, it could be like a virus. so what you really want to do is to deal with these symptoms. is to not deal with them directly but instead deal with the cuase. if you can get at the cause, and if you can somehow eliminate it then the symptoms should just disappear. and so that assumption that symptoms relfect some underlying cause and it's the underlying cause you want to go after. is reflected in their method. in the medical approach you typically come up with some treatment, that hope, that you hope for whatever reason will treat that underlying cause, will reduce it's strength, and if that works then the patient will feel better. now, now in this case it didn't work. apparently, we tried a treatment and the patient looks just as, as bad, as she did before. and so we might try different treatments and it becomes this quest of coming up with treatments that work and we sometimes don't even really care why they work, if we find some treatment that makes a patient feel better, that's cool. that's really cool and we'll use it widely and hope it makes other patients feel better. now this whole way of doing things is very different from the scientific method. the notion of, you know, manipulating some variable tightly across groups, and seeing what effect that variable has, and measuring everything as you go along, and doing very controlled, intentional comparisons of data. that is not what freud did. what freud tended to do was interact with patients, and if he found a patient that had psychological issues, but no clear physical cause, he would try to figure out what the underlying conflict was. and he would go back to eh, notions like the id and the ego, and what could be going on underneath, causing this conflict, that ultimately was causing the symptoms that you'd see. and once he, and now this is hard, of course, because often these psychic conflicts are completely unconscious, so he came up with all these ways of trying to get at this conflict. because he felt really the right way to treat this was to bring it in to the patient's awareness. that once they understood that underlying conflict, that alone might be the beginning of a treatment that might alleviate the symptoms. so before we go any further i want you to get a bigger picture of, of freud in general. and so i've got a couple of links here. one is just, this is meant to show you why freud was provocative. okay, this is a, a link to a short video about freud's psychosexual development of personality. so even with kids he thought, he emphasized that kids were seeking sensual pleasures in the victorian era so check that out see what you think of that. and then once you watch that, watch this which is part one of a documentary that really kind of outlines freud's influence and, and and why he has this dual nature of being both loved at some ways and hated in others. okay, so check that out and then come on back. alright, welcome back. so what i now want to emphasize is just at the very end of this is, is, is this impact freud had. by through his ideas and through his approach, he forged a new path psychology was all about showing you could scientifically study the mind. the story i was telling you before this lecture. but, suddenly freud is bringing a much more clinical approach, he's, he's trying to treat people with psychological disorders and he's coming at it from a medical perspective. and that's very different and that caused a lot of tension in the early days in psychology. what was psychology to be was it to be a science or was it to be more like a healthcare approach that's the story we're going to continue in the next lecture. and you're going to see there was some really strong backlash within the scientific community to freud's ideas that led to, you know, in some ways this identify crisis widening. although more recently i think it's coming back together. so we'll talk about that in the subsequent lecture. i did give you just a couple of other things here you could follow up on. first of all there's part two and three of that documentary that you just watched. if you, if you haven't gotten enough and you want more. but i also gave you a link here to the complete works of sigmund freud. why i did that is i think you should just pick some, pick something and read a little bit of it because what i would like you to notice is that just about anything that you read is fascinating. i mean freud had something really interesting stories, interesting ideas about how things all work. but can't help but fascinate the mind. they're good reading. but i hope you'll also consider the following: when you're exposed to these ideas, ask yourself, "if i were a scientist, how would i test this idea to find out if it were true or not?. and what many scientists have concluded is that the vast majority of freud's ideas are scientifically untestable. they're just interesting ideas that you can never verify as being correct or not. and to a scientist, that makes them almost worthless. so think about that too, because that will be a good lead-in to some of the scientific backlash we'll take up in the next lecture. right. thank you, see you there. have a good day!
alright. back to the past, not back to the future. we're back to the past. talking more about history. history of psychology. and specifically looking at the ripples, i guess, from that big stone that freud threw into this discipline that was developing. it was developing with a very scientific focus. and then freud suddenly brought in this medical curveball, as it were, and stopped it being about sort of the study of the conscious mind. and instead kind of shaped it toward the study of pathology, of mental disorders. in fact along the way developed all these theories that extended well beyond mental disorders. and became in a sense theories about human behavior but theories that the scientific community felt just couldn't be tested. they were not scientific theories. they were just pulled out of thin air very fascinating, very interesting. but how do you know if it's real and if can never test whether it's real, then it's not science. okay? so how did they then react to this. let's find out. lecture five, psychology after freud. alright. well, perhaps not surprisingly the reaction was to suddenly retreat and, and in fact, become more scientific than ever before. and, and what i'm referring to of course now is the scientific group within psychology. though the, the clinical psychology that freud started continued on and flourished, okay. and i'll come back to that in a point, but it's certainly not the case that people went flocking away from clinical psychology. once freud had kind of set that stake in the ground, it was there, and it continued on. but the more scientific-minded psychologists they did react to freud's ideas. and they reacted by saying, oh my goodness, we want to be a science of, a science of the mind, a science of psychology. we really have to be scientific. we cannot just come up with things like id and ego, and throw it out there, and, and suggest maybe its true if we can't prove that's true. we have to be much more discipline. now specifically they really went to a far end of the discipline scale. the suggestion was by most behaviorism and that's why this new school of psychology is called behaviorism. behaviorists said, here's the best way to go. let's restrict our experiments and our theories to things we can manipulate and things we can measure precisely. some people call this sr psychology , stimuli, which are things you can manipulate and responses which are things you can measure. and, you know, what happens in between? let's not talk about that because we don't know. those are theoretical things. we can't see what happens between when we present a stimulus and a person responds and so let's just not go there. let's keep that separate. okay, let me give you an example and i'm gon, i'm going to use this example for a couple of reasons. first to show that you can still get out some very interesting issues. despite these constraints but, also i hope to give you a sense that these are constraints. boundaries and therefore it's not surprising that future psychologists are going to try to break out of them. but here's a good example to give you a start. so this is the little albert experiment. it's one of the famous psychology experiments partly because of it's dubious ethics. it's a little worrisome. if this was your child i don't think you would be happy about it. but this is how the experiment worked. we start with albert here, little albert, and before anything happens we have little albert in a room and we expose him to nice, little, furry creatures like this. and we look at his response. so the creatures would be the stimulus. so here's a stimulus here, a little furry rabbit. and the response would be literally how does albert respond. and as kind of suggested in this picture, if you ignore the ominous hammer for a second. albert's okay with the rabbit, oklay? and early on, before anything happened in this experiement, albert was fine with furry critters. no fear response, no negativity at all. now he did show negativity to other stimuli. so let's forget about the critters for a second and say, okay, we have albert in a room. and somebody bangs on something metal with a hammer, makes that clanging sound. that scares albert. so albert gets scared and he cries and he reacts in fear. so rabbit doesn't produce any reaction. hammer produces fear, and so now the experiment is, well what if we now associate the critter with the noise? 'kay, what if we reliably do the following, we have albert in a room right now, there's nothing else in the room, but then we introduce a furry critter. and if albert approaches the critter or if the critter approaches albert then we clang. we hit our hammer on that thing and clang which of course makes albert cry because he's scared of that noise. we give him trial after trial of this. we introduce another critter, another clang, another critter, another clang. let's say we do that 20 times. then we, then we're not going to claim it anymore. we're not going to hit anything anymore. but now we just bring the critter in. what's albert do? well what albert does is he acts scared. okay he's learned to associate this critter that used to be perfectly fine for him with something that scared him. and now he reacts in fear, not only to rabbits, by the way, but to stuffed rabbits, to shoals that are furry, to anything sort of like that. he's suddenly scared of all these things. so to the behaviorists they say, okay, now this is a cool experiment. because we've just manipulated the stimuli in ways we can measure. you know, the rabbit was there without the clang and then we had a rabbit with the clang. so this is all very clear and scientific what we did. and the behaviors that albert shows are clearly measurable and categorizable in a way we all agree. and what we've shown in this experiment is that something like fear can be conditioned. okay. you can learn to become scared of something, and that's what we've demonstrated. so, you know. absolutely true. it's, it's a bit of a creepy experiment so i've got a link here. and what i'd like you to do is take a moment and follow that link. and it'll show you, you know, real footage of this experiment and i think you'll find it a little uncomfortable. but you know it, it really does show this notion of behaviorism and the importance of the environment in terms of effecting how we grow. so it has some profound implications. so let's start there. 'kay, check that out and come on back. alright, welcome back. well, so behaviorism was really important for psychology. it, it was that retreat to a much more scientific place and so now we really had a pretty big split. we had clinical psychology going strong but clinical psychology was really about the treatment. pre-, predominantly a mental disorders. then we had this experimental psychology that was more just generally inquisitive about, you know, human nature and what can we learn. but the problem was that this behaviorist approach, restricting yourself to stimuli and responses, there's only so much you can do within that space. and it was kind of like psychologists needed a way out and they got a way out. the, in the 1960s, computers started to become more common. and that's important because computers formed a very important analogy for psychologists. here were devices that kind of did things humans did. they took input and they produced output. so kind of like a behavioral stimulus response. but, there were also very clear concrete things that happened in between. so that input, it was plotted into the computer but then if you're a, a technician or an engineer. you can really specify how that information was past from component to component. how it was changed and how it ultimately, for example, produced something on the computer screen. so this notion was called information processing. that's what a computer did was processed information. and when a lot of psychologist looked at this they said, it's kind of like what we do, isn't it? as a memory system, it's getting inputs from the world. it's producing outputs on the world. maybe we can think of this as[unknown] to a human. maybe we can think of the hardware as the brain, and then the program, the software, is thoughts. as cognitive experiences. and so suddenly this was an analogy. and suddenly things like memory, which seemed really squishy before. there was this concrete notion of memory in a computer, and so it didn't seem quite as theoretical. it seemed much more reasonable to talk about various components of an information processing system. and a lot of that way of thinking was now imported into psychology and with it came the notion that, okay we agree with the behaviors. we have to be scientific, but what we don't agree with is that you have to be able to directly measure everything you're[unknown] interested in. if what you're interested in leaves some sort of trace, so if learning leaves a trace of some sort. and we can look at that trace, we can make inferences about learning. we can go ahead and talk about that theoretical construct. and infer what the data tells us, about that. so that really opened the door. and it was kind of a middle ground. we're going to be a little theoretical. we're going to deal with some of these abstract concepts, but we're going to do it scientifically. now cognitive psychology was primarily interested in the individual. thinking about sort of the average individual. and how does the average memory system work, and the average attention system work. this was also a time of course of civil unrest in, in the 60s, and 70s, and think of things like vietnam, political unrest. you know, communism versus fascism, although fascism was large, was largely kind of deteriorating by that point in time. but there was political instability and so people kind of, some psychologists said well, i want to know more than that. i want to actually study things like how humans influence each other, and how groups work together. how things like prejudice are formed. this was also times in america, things like segregation. and so this new kind of psychology opened up, social psychology. that's really about how humans interact with one another. at the same time, both of these, you can kind of say, are still focused on the average human being. the way an average human being's system works, the way that average human being is influenced by others. some psychologists thought, well, that's interesting, but i actually want to know how a given individual is different from another. so they study things like, for example, intelligence. what makes one person more intelligent than another person. and is there anything we can do about that. so it's often educational systems really drove studies of individual differences and trying to learn about that. things like personality would fall under this too. how is my personality different from your personality? can we measure that? how, how stable are our personalities? so these are things that make one individual different from another. that's now a thriving area of psychology. i'm just kind of throwing out some of the things that are big now. cross-cultural psychology is newer but really critical and really interesting in the context of something like this mook. the idea behind this is, hey, the way we think and the way we behave is partly determined by the culture in which we live. that there isn't a human behavior. there, there's a culturally bound human behavior on what might be considered perfectly reasonable behavior within one culture may not be considered reasonable behavior within a different culture. or even you know more suddenly than that perhaps there are ways in which culture determines the way humans think. and so this is an area called, called cross-cultural psychology. and it's becoming quite big now because of, of, of how much our cultures are intermixing in this globalized world. it's really important that we understand each other and how we're different. as i mentioned, clinical psychology, of course, has been, has been marching on. i highlight it here because i, i just want to be clear that it's, it's not just freud. since freud other schools of clinical psychology have also opened up. i'll give you one taste of that. there's one kind of clinical psychology that's called positive psychology. and the pause of psychology is also a reaction of freud in a way. because it was kind of like these people looking at freud's theory and saying, gee he's focusing on aggression, sexuality. kind of like the darkest aspects of human nature. but there's some good things about humans. there's things like empathy and creativity. and altruism, shouldn't we study those? shouldn't we try to understand those? what about a clinical approach that isn't focused on disorders, but is focused on helping individuals reach their maximum potential. and so a positive psychologist doesn't even talk about the people they see as patients, they call them clients. and they think of themselves kind of like a financial planner would think, you know i'm helping you get a healthy bank account. well positive psychologist is trying to lie to lead a mentally healthy life, so they're not focused on the problems. they're focused on positive side of things, that gives you a taste of clinical psychology. but the last one i really want to highlight and it's party because of it's recency, but also because of its dominance. is what i'm calling the biological revolution. with scanning devices, brain scanning devices, becoming so powerful and so within reach to researchers over the last, oh i'd say, you know, 20 years, but especially the last 10, let's say. we can now watch the brain in action. and so while a cognitive psychologist is, would say they're primarily interested in the software, the mind. how information is processed, we can now ask our participants to do some information processing task. but we can watch their brain as they do it. so we can actually, in addition to seeing how they do on the task, we can learn the relationship between that and the underline hardware, the brain. so over the last little while while we've learned a lot about the brain from these devices. and, it's become so omnipotent that any of these areas that we taked about now you could remove the word psychology. and throw in the word neuroscience, cognitive neuroscience, social neuroscience, well this doesn't really happen in psychology but, cross cultural neuroscience, clinical neuroscience as areas where, yeah, maybe someone's interested in prejudice let's say, but maybe they're interested in seeing how prejudicial behavior is related to the brain. and so they're considering the brain at the same time. so that's a very important part of psychology, in fact it's so important now, that's where we're going to begin. we're going to move now in week 2 to a careful analysis of the brain so that we have a good understanding of what it's about. and then once we have that in our pocket, we can now talk about some of these other areas. and some of their coolest experiments and kind of play that same game of learning what we learned. and also thinking about how it relates to the brain. that's the journey ahead. i look forward to taking it with you. let the adventure continue.
okay so, in, in, most of the rest of this course we're going to be talking about psychology experiments. sometimes they will be experiments related to just humans in general. and sometimes they will be more specifically related to clinical sorts of issues. what we're really going to approach psychology from a scientific perspective and so one of the first things i want to do then and, and we'll do over the next three lectures is to really make you very comfortable with the scientific method and to, to actually turn you guys into scientists yourself. so the next three lectures i'm just going to hit a few highlights of the scientific method and some of the, some of the approaches that we use along the way. and then in the activity at the end of this week, you're going to get your hands dirty. you're going to get in there with your own data. and i'm going to ask, allow you to ask some questions about yourselves and, and ultimately arrive at some answers. so i think it'll be a lot of fun and i think by the end of this process you'll feel really you know, confident and strong about your ability to think about science. and from there on we'll have a great base to consider a bunch of psychology's coolest experiments. so, let's get into the science then. week one, lecture six, truth seeking, i call it, because really, this is all about, trying to find the truth and the approach that most people believe now is the right approach. so let me go back a little bit in time, because there was a little bit of a philosophical battle, for a while. there was a school of, of thought called the rationalists who believed that you could ultimately come to understand something simply by thinking about it well enough and deeply enough. and, and perhaps also by arguing with others about it. but through, you know, words and thoughts, you could eventually figure out the truth of some situation. so people who believed that were called the rationalists. but they were challenged as we moved in the, in the 1700's and the 1800's by the empiricists. so a, a, a sort of new school of philosophers who thought that thinking and talking and arguing wasn't enough. that that would be a good way to arrive at a, a good sense of what the critical questions were, but if you really wanted to know the truth, you could only know that through your senses. they would say, and what they meant by that was by actually doing experiments by, you know, testing your theory in a very real way. and seeing if the predictions it makes holds up. so, that is what we now call the empirical approach. and that is really what defines anything as truly being a science. so, when we say psychology is a science, what we're actually mean is, we drive truths by experimentation. that's how we come to believe we've learned something about human behavior or human mind through experiments. experiments specifically designed to test theories. okay, well, that's great. so, what we're really talking about now is some inner play of questions and answers, and i want to stress that a big part of the scientific process is coming up with the questions. so, you can never get to the truth until you know what truth you would like to know about and so you have to have some sense of what the question is that you're trying to answer. and in fact, often there are a couple, three facets that i'm going to highlight of the scientific approach. that can be linked separately to either the questions or the answers, although one's pretty ambiguous. so, specifically if you're seeking questions, you usually begin doing something called observational research. this could be very formal, or very informal. that's what we'll spend the rest of this lecture talking about. you can also do something called correlational research. now, correlational research can sometimes seem as though it's providing answers. but it's very tricky in that regard the answer it provides are, are very open to alternative explanations and so it has this tendency sometimes correlational studies have seeming to have told you something really solid and scientific. but you have to be very careful about it so we're going to spend the second lecture in this series. talking about correlational research. now that'll actually be what the seventh in the first week. and then finally in the last lecture of this week we're going to talk about the real way to get at good solid answers and that's through experiments and contrasts. so a lot, you know, i've put the correlational research in with the seeking questions, because correlational research really does give us a good sense of potential realities. but if we want to really understand them well, we typically have to move on to an experimental approach. and we will spend the last lecture this week talking about the experimental approach and, and generally how you can look for contrasts across, levels of some variable and that, that can be very informative. okay, but for now let's focus on observational reasearch and again firmly entrench the notion that this is about seeking questions. i think the best known the best example of observational research comes from jane goodall eleanor work with chimpanzees. jane literally she wanted to understand these sociology and, and the behavior of chimpanzees she wanted to know how they lived and she felt that the best way to learn that was to live with them. so she literally you know went with the chimpanzees, went, camped there in the same areas and tried to mingle with them. tried to get, you know right in there so that she could watch their behavior and observe their behavior. now of course, this is a very tricky thing to do. observational research is always tricky because the actual presence of the observer usually changes the behavior they're interested in. you know, so for example, imagine you and i are having this interplay right now and an alien kind of beams into the room beside you and, but, but says to you somehow, hey, don't worry about me. i'm just here to watch. i, i'm just going to sit here and watch you guys interact. so, pretend i'm not here. well, sometimes, you just can't pretend somebody's not there. and if an alien were sitting right behind you, your behavior would likely change. just like the chimps' behavior, likely changed, with jane goodall, being among them. now jane tried everything she could, in terms of being very submissive, being very non-intimidating. trying to adorn herself with the same smells and scents that they were adorned in. so rolling around on the ground, you know, covering herself with feces if necessary. and really trying to be just non-intrusive. trying to be just sort of something in the corner. i'm hoping that, that would minimize the, the effect on their behavior, but that's the real problem with observational research. it, it's really good for generating questions for kind of getting an idea of what you think might be going on. but there is always that fact that the observer is there and, and that always makes any answers pretty tenuous at best. so more on the question side of things. in psychology, you know, here are some things i want you to think about. we are all informal observational researchers. we all watch the world around us, we watch people behave and we sort of drive ideas or hypotheses. so here are some i'd like you just to think about, based on your experience as a human being. do you think males or females are better at math? do you think males or females are better singers? do you think memory gets worse with, with age? and what about language abilites, do they get worse with age? do you think old people are more likely then young people to be depressed? and what, whatever answer you get, would that be culturally invariant? would it be true of every culture? or do you think maybe that's true in some cultures, but not others, okay? these are all just things i throw out there where you could imagine a human being kind of observing the world around them, and observing things, and, and kind of forming questions in their mind. hm, i wonder if it's true. it seems to be the case that. i wonder if this is true. so that's the real role observational research plays. generating that question and, and sort of driving the mind to now try to come up with a more formal way of arriving at an answer, okay? i want to just at the end of this to give you a nice little tasty morsel, tell you though, that observational research can go a little further. and this is a really interesting example, rosehan's being sane in insane places. he and about nine of his friends, well he had this original doubt that stemmed from observational work itself. he felt like he was not sure that clinical psychologists of his day could distinguish between people who really were and really were not mentally ill. so he and nine of his friends agreed that they would go to an admissions clinic at, at a psychiatric hospital, and tell the person that interviewed them basically everything truthfully. so they answered every question truthfully. but they, except for the following. first of all they said they were hearing voices in their head. that they couldn't quite always hear but they think it might of said something like empty or thud something like that. but otherwise they didn't, they, they just answered every question completely honestly. they, they probably lied about what their profession was and, and perhaps changed their name. but otherwise, the only real deception was saying they heard these voices. now, not, they were all committed to the psychiatric hospital. nine of them with with the label of being schizophrenic. so they were all admitted and they weren't allowed to leave. one of the questions, you know that was the point when rosenhan was really interested in. okay, now at this point, when we're in the mental hospital, because he thought they would get admitted. how long does it take for the people that work there to recognize that a sane person is a sane person. so everybody that was admitted was told, once you're in, act as sane as you can act, answer every question honestly, be very cooperative and let's just see how long it takes them to realize that you're sane. the answer is, people got admitted as early as nine days after admission but as long as fifty two days so some people just had a really hard time getting out of the mental hospital. the, the staff the people they worked with did not believe them when they said they felt better. they weren't experiencing any symptoms, and they thought they were fine. the funny thing is, a lot of the patients did detect that they really were not insane, that they did not belong there. but a lot of the staff and such, did not. so, rosenhan wrote a paper about this, talked to the media a lot and it was, at that time, a pretty strong blow to clinical psychology. and you know, fascinating example of an observational study that went another step. what would happen if and so we tried something, fascinating, okay. so that gives you a feel for for the role of observational research and the scientific process. i've got some links for you. one is a general research methods good for the section we're doing now. and i've got one that talks about how they use observational research in marketing, realms to, to sell you stuff. a reading about observational research as well. and then i have a link to a short article on that, being sane in insane places, in case i wet your appetitite and you'd like to know more. follow that. but now that we have this general heading we're going to move forward. and, let's go to the next lecture where we start talking about associations between variables and how they so tempt us to believe we found a truth but how dangerous they actually are in that respect.
knowledge by association. we often hear people tell us things about associations between two variables. in so doing, they seem to be telling us something really profound, or something important. let me give you a surprising one that i heard once and it really had me scratching my head. i heard on the radio that, the more cheeseburgers that one eats, the lower the rate of dying of cancer. what? eating cheeseburgers protects you from death of cancer, by cancer? it turns out it's true. and that sounds really impor, informative, right? it might make you think wow, i have to change my diet. i should go out there and start eating a buncha cheeseburgers. now, as a vegetarian saying this to you, i have to tell you that's a very hard thing for me to say. but in fact, it's not the right course of action, either, because the reason that correlation exists is because eating a lot of cheeseburgers, increases by a significant amount your likelihood of dying of a heart attack. if you die of a heart attack, you can't die of cancer. so these things can be very tricky. yeah, it's not, it's not, eating cheeseburgers is not reducing your likelihood of dying; you just die of a heart attack before you can die of cancer. so, you really shouldn't go an eat a bunch of cheeseburgers. veggie burgers, maybe, not cheese burgers. this is the trick with, with association. so lets consider association in detail because there is a lot of value in these studies, but its just important that the consumer of this information understands the limits. so let's do it. week one, lecture seven, knowledge by association. i want to start by just giving you a real concrete feel of this. and, and this is one of, a really cool study in psychology that gets a lot of people's head kind of scratching like, what is this about? and it's all about marshmallows, and you would never understand the power that a marshmallow could have as a diagnostic instrument. but it turns out it does. so what i'd like you to do before i talk any more, is check out each of these links in succession. so first of all, click on the stanford marshmallow experiment link, watch the video about that and then check out the article about it that appeared in the new yorker. and think about all of that stuff and then come on back. okay? cool. all right. welcome back. pretty cool, eh? wow. just, you know, being able to wait to what's called delay gratification, those who could delay gratification longer, seem to have more success in life, measured all sorts of ways, including something as concrete as an sat score. what does that study tell you? i mean, it's cool, it's fascinating. does it give you answers? or does it raise questions? in my opinion, it raises more questions than it does answers. and the answers it gives you are really kind of tenuous. i mean, it does tell you, well there's something there, there's some sort of link. there, there's a good reason to investigation this relationship further but it kind of stops there. all right, let me hold that point for a moment, because we, we're going to have to spend a little bit of time getting you used to some of the terminology people use when they talk about correlations. and some of the graphical depictions they use. so specifically, these things are things called scatter plots, so this is six different scatter plots. each one of these scatter plots shows you a correlation coefficient within it, that thing that says r. so, i want to make these make sense for you, so let's go to a different example for now, an example i've kind of depicted over here. imagine we asked a bunch of women to rate two things about themselves. the first is just their height. tell us how tall you are. the second is on let's say a 1 to 10 scale, how attractive do you feel? how attractive of a woman do you think you are? and we want to know if there's a relationship between this, between height and attractiveness. but here's the twist. let's say we ask 18 year old women this question, but we also asked 13 year old women this question. why 13? let me get to that. let's start with the 18 year olds. what would we expect for 18 year old women? well, our society seems to value tallness for some reason. we tend to associate tall people as being more attractive. and so what we might expect is that the taller women, will consider themselves more attractive. so, on this scatter plot, each one of these points represents a single person, and it represents two things about that person. how tall were they? you could figure that out by following this down to here. that tells you how tall they were. and how attractive did they feel they were? you figure that out. by going over here. so, this is somebody that's sort of shortish you, know short to medium and doesn't think they're very attractive. where as this person relatively tall and does think they're attractive. this other person by the way is actually a little shorter than the one i was just telling you about. just a smidge shorter but they really think they're attractive. okay. so every one of these points is just that, a single person. and when we now lay these points out, we can get a sense of the shape of what's sometimes called the cloud. lemme give you a sense of that. that's okay. you can kind of see it with your eyes if i just trace my mouse like this. this is like the cloud of points, and we want to know a couple of things about this cloud. we want to know which direction it goes. does it go like this one, which is, sort of, up into the right. when something goes up into the right like that, as this line kind of shows you. that's what we call a positive correlation. that means these two variables have a very specific kind of relationship. as one variable gets bigger, the other one also tends to get bigger. ok? they go together. they're positively related, so the taller somebody is, the more physcially attractive they feel. both of those things kind of grow together or shrink together. the shorter somebody is, the less physically attractive they feel. okay, that's what we call a positive correlation when that's true. this number represents how strong that correlation is and it can range from zero to one. actually, as you'll find out in a moment, it can range from minus 1 to 1. but let's, let's stick to the 0 to 1 for now. so in this case, the correlation is pretty close to that 1. it's 0.7. so this is what we would call a strong correlative relation. these two variables seem strongly interconnected. now it could be the case that there is still a positive correlation, but it's not so strong. so in this case, notice how the cloud is a lot bigger, and that tendency to be going up and to the right is less extreme. if there's lower, there's a lower slope on this line what that suggests is we still have a positive correlation. if this was height and attractiveness again it would be, it's still the case that as people are taller they think they're more attractive, but that relationship isn't as strong as it is over here. there are some not tall people who think they're pretty attractive. and there are some tall people who don't think they're very attractive. and so its a weaker relationship between them. in fact if it was zero, the line would be completely flat and this would suggest there's no relation. that you can look at tall people. some think they're attractive. some don't. you look at short. some of them think they're attractive. some don't. this would be no relationship. a, a, weak relationship. a much stronger relationship. now, this pattern, this sort of pattern can happen in this way, up and to the right. but it can also happen in this way, what we're going to call a negative correlation. in fact, this should have a negative sign in front of it. and i see that it doesn't right now. the negative correlation is a different kind of relationship. so now let's go back to our 13 year olds to make you feel what this means. we've asked the same question, how tall are you and how physically attractive do you feel. but at around 13, 12 or 13. it's an interesting time in children's lives because women go through puberty first. so they tend to grow and be quite tall, and the boys are lagging behind. and that leads to a phenomenon that we all know, this sort of phenomenon where the girls are dancing with boys that seem much smaller and younger than they do, less mature. now, i know from some of the girls in, that i went to school with, they used to call this the ogre time. because they felt like ogres, they felt like they were big and hulking over the boys. and they were very self conscious about their height. and so at this age, what you might actually find is that the taller a girl is, the less attractive she feels. so as height goes up ratings of physical attractiveness go down. so now these variables are what we call negatively correlated because they work in that opposite direction. they don't change together, they change and go in different directions. as height goes up ratings of physical attractiveness go down. so when that happens, you see this slope that's sort of downward and to the right but again everything else holds. you can, you can have that sort of relation where the points are very close to the line, you have a very small cloud of points like this, that's a strong one. but again you can have a weaker correlation that's still negative, and again this should say negative 0.3 here or again, you can have this lack of correlation. but this is a good example, how these same two variables, the relation you see between them, may actually change over the course of a lifespan. there may be a time when tall girls feel less attractive, and then later in their lives, they may feel more attractive. okay, again the idea of that is to give you just a feel of what these correlations mean and the importance of the direction. the positive versus the negative. and to introduce you to scatterplots. because you're going to see those on occasion. alright, now i want to end this section of association just by being clear about the limits. you can find two variables are related, but that really does not tell you any deep truth, you have to be very careful. it does bring to mind potential questions, but it doesn't give you really solid answers. so, let me give you this little gem, this is true. taller people earn more money so, studies that have compared a persons height with their earnings show that the taller you are the more money you tend to make. okay, cool interesting why you know, we, we get some obvious images in our mind well that probably means that when, when somebody's interviewing people. for some reason, they are biased towards tall people. so the tall people end up getting the job. well, that's kind of what you want to think is true from this, but is that true? is that, in reality what's going on? well, maybe not. there can be all sorts of things that can cause two variables to be related. so for example, a lot of digging with experiments of this little tidbit have suggested the following. what's really going on here is what we call a third variable. let me explain. that third variable will be socioeconomic status or how rich or poor a person is. and the claim is the following. if you grow up in a rich household, you're more likely to get good nutrition in your food. you're likely to get better foods as you're growing up and those better foods are going to maximize your potential for height, so rich people tend to be taller because of the food they eat. now rich people also tend to be better connected in the job market. if your parents were well off, they probably hung around with other people who were well off, people who could potentially provide employment. and so the social network that you grow up in, is one of affluence. it's one where you're around other people who are making more money, and you have potentially the the, the potential to give you well-paying jobs. so that seems to be what's going on. people who grow up rich, become tall and end up in better-paying jobs. but they didn't get the better-paying job because they were tall, they got it because their family knew the right people. and they were tall because their family was rich. okay, so it's that third variable that's causing both of these things, and making them look like they're related to one another, okay. there can also be other constraints. this is like the cheeseburger example that i led off with. you know, sometimes it looks like there's a relationship as though, one, eating cheeseburgers causes reduce cancer deaths. but in reality there's some constraint that's making that relationship true which is that cheeseburgers actually increase the likelihood of a heart attack death. so this is the problem with correlations. they're very enticing, they're very interesting they get our mind thinking all of that is good. but they also sometimes seem to suggest a truth, and very often that truth should not be trusted on the basis of a correlation alone. we want to go the next step, which i'll talk to you about in the next lecture, but just as a little extra for this lecture. this one's just silly, okay? i have a link here where a bunch of adults have recreated that child marshmallow test you've seen. and it's funny. that's the only reason i include it. it's just kind of funny to watch adults doing it. it's funny when the kids did it, and it's just kind of funnier when the adults did it. so i just threw that in there for, to give you a smile i guess. but here's a video about correlation and causation, some of the, some of the issues about correlations to think about. and then i have a couple of readings, that are going to show you the mathematical guts behind those correlation coefficients i was just talking about, how you compute them. i don't expect you to know the math. but you know, i, i would suggest you give it a look. because one of the things i think you'll see is that the math is not very complex. it's actually quite simple. and so, to the extent that you can understand the math, it can make you feel a little bit better, like you understand. what these correlation coefficients are. so i, i leave that up to you to, to investigate as deeply or not as you'd like. and then come on back, and we'll talk about how contrasting two situations can finally get us to a much harder truth about what's going on in some situation.
okay, so if you really want the truth you have to do an experiment. we're going to talk about contrast in general, but experiments are very special kind of contrast where you create conditions with the express idea to test some idea or theory. and one of the things that experiments can get you that, for example, correlational studies cannot, is they can actually show causation and, and what we mean by that is we can actually show that a manipulation of some variable causes changes in some other variable. and that's when we really feel like we understand what's going on. so let's jump into that. all right. last lecture for week one, knowledge by contrast. i want to just kind of walk you through an example so you get a really good sense of what an experiment is, the process, and what makes it special. so, let's say we have this theory, and this is a theory that's been around for a while. it's called evolution theory and it's some, you know, surprising to some, but it is a contentious theory, and so i want to tell you one experiment related to evolution theory, and use it as an example. so here's the theory, the, the big theory. animals diverge into different species as a result of changes in or differences of environmental conditions, like food sources. so, darwin said, you know, you, the survival of the fittest. by, what he meant by fittest was, those who fit the environment best survive. and the attributes that they had now tended to be the ones that were shown in, in higher numbers in, in their next generation the children that they produced. so that eventually a species will evolve to fit an environment. okay, that's the big theory. well, can we derive a prediction, a testable prediction from that theory. well, here's one. if this is true, then it should be possible to start with some single species of animal, but create different species by consistently exposing random sub-groups, you hope, to different environmental conditions. for example like food sources, so we can take our, our little friend drosophila here, common fly. drosophila is the subject of many experiments. and in the one i'm going to talk about, here's what they did. they took a bunch of drosophila, a bunch of flies, and then they randomly created two subgroups. now these subgroups were no different originally. that's the joy. that's the advantage. that's the reason why we like random assignment. if you start with a group, and then you randomly assign individuals to two different conditions, then you assume that those individuals on average are very similar. there's no reason we should expect any systematic difference, at least, across those groups when we start. now we do some manipulation. and we want to see whether that manipulation will have an effect. on some variable. let me come back to that, let's just do it. so let's say we have these two subgroups now that we've randomly derived from our flies. and now this subgroup we're going to give a starch type food. not just to this group but to it's offspring and to it's offspring's offspring. so in fact we're going to allow eight generations to pass and all of those flies will only ever get access to the starchy food. ok, in contrast, this other group, which originally were the same, we're only going to let them get access to maltose food. and the same kind of idea. so not just them their offspring and their offspring's offspring, so eight generations. of now maltose-eating drosphilia. okay. and so the question is: well, does this matter? if we expose them to different food sources, do we see any sense of them becoming different species? well, here's what you do see: you will see that these starch-eating drosphilia first of all look different. they tend to become much lighter, much more yellowy, whereas the maltose food[inaudible] become much darker, much browner, a golden, sort of golden brown. so we're definitely seeing an effect of the food. it's certainly changing the physical characteristics of our research subject. and, and this is one of the things we associate with different species, right? different species look different somehow. but there's another aspect of different species too. different species tend not to interbreed. and so, if we now allow these drosophilia, these 2 populations to now merge and hang around. and now, we watch their mating behavior. what you will see is that they will only mate within species. so the starch-eating ones will seek out other starch-eating ones. and the maltose-eating ones will seek out other maltose-eating ones, and they will not interbreed. this is the mark of them truly, being individual species. so it certainly seems that by manipulating through source. we were able to create two species of drosophila, okay. so if you just sort of backing up a little bit, because i want to give you some of this terminology too. when we do an experiment like this, we're almost always manipulating some variable. and then looking at the effects of that manipulation on other variables. the one we manipulate we call the independent variable. and in this case, that would be the food source. so we, the experimenter, decided who was going to get which food source. so we were in control of that, and we manipulated that. ok? so that's what the independent variable is. we thou, now want to see, okay, what effects did that manipulation have? well, on what? so what are we going to measure to look for effects? well we want to measure species i, species i. speciation. thank you. we want to measure speciation and there's sort of two things relate this speciation. one is species specific markings. so we want to look at the physical characteristics for example. that would be the yellowy color versus the darker color. so according to that variable, the color of. the drasphelia you do indeed see a difference and we are also curious about this intermating because we know this is a marker of spec-, i've lost it again, my goodness. of there being 2 different species speciation there we go and so we want to look at mating behavior to see how often they mate within species or at least within food source or across food source. so those things would be what we call our dependent variables. and we hope, or we expect, that if our theory's right, and we manipulate our independent variable in a way where our theory predicts something should happen, then when we measure our dependent variable, and contrast it across those levels of the independent variable, which would be starch root versus maltose. we expect to see differences okay, so we're really looking for differences now of some depedent variable as a function of the independent variable. when we do that, the test we use is actually a variety depending on the design but the most simple test and the one we'll be playing with in the activity in this course. is something called a t test. so i want to just give you a really general idea of what a t test is again without getting in too much of the, of the guts. but a t test is a ratio. because what we really want to know, let's imagine the color of the drosophila. you can measure color on a continuum. and so, if this the starch-eating ones, you would see some that were you know, up up, eh, it, it well frequency of light let's say. and so let's say this is sort of a yellowy color. well some are more or less yellow, some individual. so, most of them are probably right around this yellow color. but there's a few that are, a little on the paler side, and a few that are on the, the darker side, of the yellow. here's this other group. whoops, i'm sorry. the maltose eating ones and we expect them generally to be darker but again, we see a distribution where we have some really dark maltose ones and some not so dark maltose ones. and we have this whole distribution. and what we want to know is, on average. did the starch eating ones seem different than the maltos eating ones? is the average starch-eating drosophila more light than the average maltose-eating drosophila? so, is this difference, something real, is it, is there a difference? well, that's a tricky question to ask, it turns out, and this is where we bring in statistics, and a branch of statistics called inferential statistics. generally though, what it does is it says well, first of all i want to know how different these two groups are. so we have our, you know, yellow ones and our darker ones. well how different are they? and it when it's trying to decide if that difference is different enough it also wants to know well, how different are individuals within each of these groups. what's the variability within the groups? and so that'll give me some notion of how much things vary just by chance when we don't manipulate anything. and now we can look at the difference caused by the manipulation and this gives us an idea of how big that is. is, if this is a lot bigger than we would expect by chance, then we're going to get excited and say we got something here. but if it's not much bigger than we expect by chance, then we don't get that excited. so we compute this t value. and large t values. that is t values that is different from zero. the further different from zero the more excited we get about them. that means there's something going on. and so literally, what we would do in an experiment like this is compute a t-value based on the data we have, and then we would compare it to some critical value, and this critical value would tell us what size of t is big enough for us to get excited? and that'll depend on the, the number of subjects we and, and a variety of other things that we're not going to get into in detail here. but the general process would be to have two groups, get some variable, like color where you measure the average for each group, and you get a sense of a variability within each group. you then compute a t value, and you compare that t value to the critical value. and if your t is more extreme, i'm being hedgey here because t's can be positive or negative depending on the order that you subtract. and really the positive or negative isn't important. it's how different from zero it is so if a t is more extreme, bigger than the critical t, then it's real. and we get excited, and we say hey, we found something. okay. you're going to get to do some of this. this is partly why i'm taking the time here. because you'll be involved in this process. and that'll give you a really good sense of it. alright? >> so when you get a result like that, you say you have a significant result and that's very exciting. your experiment is a success. but there's other, if we think in the bigger picture of what defines good science, there are other factors. and you're going to play with all of these factors in the digital lab code activity. so one is, well it's really great that you found some difference. but is that difference interesting? is it really interesting, is it really relevant. and this is really left up to the scientists, to really make that case. and, and what i want to highlight here is part of good science is good marketing. those scientists who can express to others why there data is important often get the headlines, and other scientists who may have just as important findings but don't market it as well can sometimes fall by the wayside. nobody reads their papers. so indeed marketing is part of science and marketing should be based on how interesting or relevant some result is. another thing that's very important is the notion of what we call replicability. and what this means is, okay, you went out and you did your experiment say on some drosophila and you found a certain result. cool, what we'd really like is if somebody else now redoes your experiment and finds the same results. if that happens with a different set of flies. and they do it all over again and they get the same thing. then we say they replicated your experiment. and that makes us feel really good that we can trust your experiment, so replicability is nice. what we then really hope to see is generalizability. so what we mean by this is, okay, it seems like the evolution theory, at least the prediction derived from it, worked on drosphilia. would it work on snakes? would it work on you know, various other kinds of animals we try? so we might want to actually try it on spiders or on something else. do the same kind of experiment, generally, and if we see the same result when we change aspects of the experiment, like the population, or like how we measure things, then that makes us feel like this is a more general finding. something we can believe to be a general truth. that yes, specia, specia, speciation, does seem to reflect changes in environmental conditions. so these are other things and you'll be able to play with some of these in that project. okay, so that's as much science as i'm going to nail you with, but i know right now a lot of this stuff is ambiguous, but wait until you get your hands dirty. once you get your hands dirty, you'll start to see that this isn't only understandable, it's kind of fun. and, and that's what digital lab code is all about. it's about making it fun. here just, i, i have a couple of videos that are really about experimental design and the scientific method just to echo and in fact you know, go beyond some of what i've told you. and now here are a couple of readings about t-tests again, showing you a little bit of the math if, if you're interested, and the general notion of comparing two different groups. so check those out and then take what you learned and go do that digital lab code activity. have fun doing it. and at the end of that, i think when you reflect upon what you learned, you'll realize that you are now a scientist. congratulations.
hey, week 2, excellent. got through week 1. and actually, let me, let me just start by, i like to thank you once already for registering for the course, but i want to really thank you. i'm, i'm a bit of an educational technology geek, as you'll come to find out. and, you know, it really is kind of cool for me to, to be part of this whole mooc thing that we're all doing together. just before taping this lecture, the number of students enrolled in this course reached 10,000. i know it's going to reach a lot higher, but that's just kind of a cool thing, and, and it's a cool number. so literally, thank you, i really appreciate it and on with the fun. so, let me sit here right, there we go. for, for this week, we are going to be talking about the brain which lives somewhere around here. there's a lot to talk about in the brain so, i'm going to get right at it, okay? alright. so, week 2 lecture 1, brain, the matter of mind. let's start with some stats. brain weighs about three pounds which is about 2% of our total body weight. now, in fact, if you compare this to other animals, that's actually a very high, what we call brain to body ratio. we have the biggest brain of any animal relative to the size of our body. other animals like whales and such obviously have bigger brains, but they have bigger bodies as well. so, at 2%, we have the largest brain to body ratio. but the really interesting thing is the brain is only 2% of the body, but look at the resources it consumes. 25% of our oxygen so one of every four breaths you take goes to your brain, as a way of thinking about it. 70% of the body's glucose supply, blood sugars goes to the brain. so, the brain is a very sugar hungry organ in the body. and 25% of the nutrients you eat go towards keeping your brain healthy. so, despite its relatively small size in the body, it clearly is, is you know, a really powerful, powerful organ that's critical to our survival. there are about a 100 billion neurons, but perhaps more important than the, the number of neurons are the number of connections between these neurons, 1 quadrillion. so, million, billion, trillion, quadrillion. so there's a lot of connections, and that's really where the brain gets its computational power. the neurons themselves are relatively simplistic, as you'll see, and actually transmit information in a relatively slow way. a common copper wire transmits information much more quickly than brain tissue does. but what the brain has is this tightly interconnected web of connections. and, and that's where the power really comes from. we, we'll get to that. but i wanted, before i leave this slide, make this point that you have heard people say things like we only use 20% of our brain or, i, i don't know, i honestly have no idea where these numbers come from. and i can tell you that it's, it's just complete not true. complete not true. it, it just really isn't not true. it's, it's, it's every bit of tissue in the brain is used at least at some point to do something. it may be the case that at any given time, perhaps only 20% of neurons are active. so the brain at any given time my have 4 5ths of its neurons silent. but any given neuron will come into play at some point in time and probably not before too long. so, i, so i suspect, you know, over probably even a, a relatively short period of time, an hour, you, you've probably used every neuron in your brain. so, don't believe that when people say that, you know, only 20% of the brain is used, you just have to learn to untap the rest. we all use all of our brain. okay, so onward. let's get into the skull a little bit literally. what this is, is imagine, imagine somebody was sitting there, this is a, a really nice thought to have. but we took a, a, meat slicer, a guillotine, and cut their head completely in half, including their brain, completely in half. and now, were looking in. one of the things you see first of all, when you look at a brain cut in half this way is there seems to be a distinction between people call white matter and what people call gray matter around the outside. so, the white matter is the much denser tissue. and it literally does a couple of things. one is, it provides structure. you know, kind of like our dense bones in our body provide our body with structure that other stuff hangs on. it's kind of like the gray matter hangs on the white matter, and the white matter gives it structure. although clearly, it's not nearly as, as dense as bone tissue would be. it also delivers nutrients and allows communication to go back and forth. so, the white matter doesn't do a lot of the actual computation, not, not a lot of the figuring out of stuff. it does more of the communication of signals, more of the structure and more of the delivery of nutrients. so, you know, it kind of underlies everything. but the real computational power seems to be, all happen in these gray areas, what we sometimes call cortical tissue, the, the stuff on the outside of the brain. now, notice that these, these things are, are very kind of wrinkled. if we, if we go back for a second, look at this brain, this, this is actually, this may confuse you a little bit but the nice pinky stuff would actually be the gray matter. it doesn't look very gray in this, in this beautiful, healthy, pink brain picture. but what i want to stress for now is look at all the curves on, on this brain. we call the upper parts of these curves, the gyrus or the gyri. so, you know, anything that's on the top, whereas these indentations we call the fissures. and in fact although there's clearly individual differences my brain would look differently than your brain if we plonked them out and sat them on the table. generally, there's also a lot of similarities. and where these fissures lie tend to be in the same places and they allow us to kind of segment the brain in certain ways. and we're going to spend a lot of time talking about four different parts of the brain and when, when we get there, i, i won't do that now. but one question is, of course, why do we have these gyrian fissures and i want to give you a sense. let's sneak back to the other camera for a second. alright. so, this is kind of what the brain, we think happened with the brain that as the brain was evolving, as we were evolving brain power became very evolutionarily significant. okay. the, the smarter critters were able to survive better and produce more offspring and so there became this ever increasing need for more and more brain tissue. but, of course, the problem is our skulls are limited, there's only so much space in a skull. so, how do you take something big and put it into a small area? well, one of the things you can do is wrinkle it, okay? and by wrinkling it, you can actually get it in a smaller area, and see we have gyris and fissures forming there. and so this is the, the, the notion that if you actually took the brain and you unwrinkled it, flattened it all out, you would have a whole lot of gray matter, and the gray matter is where the action is happening. that's, that's the powerful part of the brain tissue. so, these wrinkles are all about getting as much gray matter as possible into a small skull. kind of cool. alright. let's now zoom in a little bit. okay, this gray matter, white matter. what is this stuff? so, imagine we can zoom right in and look at the smallest sort of functional element within the brain matter and what we'd see and this is really just two depictions of the same thing. what we'd see is something that we call neurons. so, this is like a nice artist rendition. very pretty. this is just more of a, you know, easy sketch to, to think about things with. but they're really representing the same thing, which is a neuron, what we call a neuron. now, these neurons have various parts to them. first of all, there's the body, just that central what we call cell body. here you see it here. in this one, it's, it's right here and it has a nucleus in the middle and you see that in both as well. this is where the neuron will make it, make decisions. it really makes the same decision over and over again. well, what's that decision? it's deciding whether it's going to send a signal to the other neurons it's connected to. so, you can almost think of this as like a, a twitter kind of verse or social networking kind of thing. that, you know, at any given moment, you have to decide whether you're going to send out a tweet about something, or not. but for you to send out something, there has to be enough reason to do that. well, how do you know whether to do that or not? i'm mixing my metaphors here, i hope you stay with me. here's how neurons work. they have these dendrites at the end or in these nice artist's renditions. this is where other neurons can communicate with this neuron, okay? so, what you see, for example, in the artist's rendition here, this would be another neuron that it, it's sending to, it's not actually connecting. if we could zoom in on what's going on here, you would see that there's a space between the sending neuron and the receiving neuron. so the, there's these little space that we're going to call synaptic cleft. but this is literally how these neurons communicate. and so, other neurons are communicating to this one. and they're telling it essentially one of two things. they're either saying, hey, get excited. get excited. get excited. or they're saying, chill, man, relax. so, we call that an excitatory signal or an inhibitory signal, okay? they're either trying to excite the neuron or they're trying to inhibit it. and now, a bunch of different neurons are connected to this one. some of them are trying to excite it, some of them are trying to inhibit it. and really, what's going on in the cell body is it's summing all of these signals and it's asking itself the question not, not literally, of course, mathematically and, and neurochemically, is there enough excitement for me to get excited? so, it's literally comparing the how much, how many excitatory signals am i getting? how many inhibitory signals am i getting? if there's enough of a difference, if there is enough more excitatory than inhibitory, enough to exceed some threshold level, then this neuron is said to fire. okay, what's that mean? well, what it means is, this electrochemical process is initiated, these gates are opened, which allow chemicals to flow back and forth. these chemicals have different charges, positive or negative. and so when they flow back and forth, they trigger this chain reaction, kind of like, you know, in a sports stadium where people do the wave. one person does the wave and then the person next to them and next to them, same idea. there's this chain reaction that happens down what we call the axon. so the axon is this very long tail as it were, that leads from the cell body, and at the very end, has these, what we call axon terminals, or terminal buttons. so, if we go to the artist rendition, you see here, is the axon. and so, the signal would translate down here, kind of like the wave, the sports thing. and then, ultimately, would come to one of these buttons, which is what we have the blow up here. and what then happens is this neuron releases some chemicals into the synaptic cleft, into that space between it and the receiving neuron. those chemicals are received by these receptors. so, they're, they're special receptor sites that are channeled, they're, they're shaped to receive certain neurotransmitters. and so, if those neurotransmitters are released, this one catches them essentially and that's how the signal gets from one neuron to the other neuron. and it could be an excitatory signal or an inhibitory signal. just because this neuron is firing doesn't mean it's sending an excitatory signal, it could be trying to shut something down as well. but that's where the, the transmission actually happens. i'll have some videos at the end of this that will point you to, that will talk about that a lot more specifics. but this is the general, you know, lowest common denominator, smallest functional unit in the brain are these neurons. the neurons are important, but what's really important are all these connections. so, if you kind of think about the way i described this now, we have a given neuron getting input from a whole bunch of neurons and then sending. this looks like it's sending it to just one neuron, but that's not accurate. it would be sending its signal to a multitude of neurons. so, it gets information from a multitude and sends it to a multitude. so, it's a highly, it's one part of a highly interconnected network. and that's really important to understanding brain processing, because if we look at something like pain, for example, pain recepting, reception, there's not a part of the brain, like a little tiny part of the brain that reacts to pain. instead, the brain seems to respond to stimulation using what's called distributed processing. it represents the information in a multitude of areas simultaneously. sometimes, the specific information being encoded are sort of parts of the greater picture. so, here's an example. this is brain areas that are related to pain processing. but we've kind of broken pain up into three aspects of it. the actual feeling that you're feeling, the emotion that feeling is causing, and any thoughts that might be triggered by this painful event. so just to give you a sense of that, imagine what you're feeling is muscle pain because you've worked out last night. well, there is a pain, there is a sensory feeling of that pain. there's an emotional feeling, which might be a little bit of but when you combine it with the cognitive, you know that that came from the fact that you worked out, and you probably feel good about working out. and so it could be that this is effective, even though it's pain, it could be sort of a positive aspect that's linked to the cognitive fact that you worked out. so now, if we look at the brain, we see that some parts of the brain are very reactive to the sensory aspects of it. those are the green ones. some parts are very sensitive to the emotional aspect, the affective aspect. we see those here in [unknown], especially. other areas are reactive to the cognitive parts, much more frontal areas of the brain. and some areas are reactive to a combination. so, this sort of brownish color reflects the combination of sensory in affective, those are areas like here. and finally the purplish represents the combination of affective and cognitive as you're seeing here, here, and here. now, i'm not going to get into what all these brain areas are right now. the point i am, i want you to take from this is that, that experience of pain is a distributive experience. it's represented by multiple parts of the brain simultaneously. thanks to these highly interconnected neuron networks of neurons. that's a really important point because the brain has to deal often with noisy inputs. so, let me make this clear. here's an apple. this, this is a distributor representation, the way i presented it to. when we see visual things, they are distributed representations. what i mean by that is if we imagine the screen and the pixels lit here, what we really have is a combination, some pixels are sending out a white signal, some pixels are sending out a red signal, some are sending out a white signal in the middle of a bunch of others that are sending out a red signal. the brain is taking all of this information and somehow combining it in order to form this concept that we all have of an apple. so we can see an apple from all this, all this information. now, imagine instead of thinking of pixels, imagine these were neurons reacting to something out there. and again, all these neurons can be sending their signals and that pattern of activation across the neurons could be what actually defines the fact that this is an apple we're experiencing. now, the nice thing about this is that it's very tolerant of noise, okay? let me throw this image up here. let's say, we put a bunch of dots over here to block out what the information that some of the pixels are sending, if you want to think at that way or imagine some neuron stopped sending signals. well, just because a bunch of neurons are not operating well or not giving us a clear signal, we can still see the apple. if there are enough that are sending consistent activation patterns, then we can still interpret what's out there even though there's a whole lot of noise. so, when we talk about graceful degradation, what we mean is if parts of brain tissue actually died, you still have an ability to interact perfectly well. no single neuron is going to suddenly make you not see what apples are anymore. and this also allows the brain to be very tolerant of noise, and that's really important. so, so, let me give you an example of that for a second. you've been listening to my voice but i'm going to shut up for a second, it'll be a rare event and [laugh], in these lectures i promise. but i'm going to shut up for a second and i want you to listen to other sounds that are around in your environment. okay, here goes. okay. so, hopefully you heard, i don't know, maybe traffic sounds, maybe voices, maybe the heater in your home, maybe, you know, hums of fans who knows. my point is, as i'm speaking, there's all of this other noise around. and your brain has to be able to deal with that. and it's by using these distributed representations that it's able to do that. and that's critical because as we, when we talk about brain functioning in general, you'll see that there's always noise present. and that's part of the brain's power, is, it's its ability to function in noisy environments to function really effectively. okay. so, that was a big intro of the brain. and we're going to start going into other more specific issues. but here's a couple videos. they're related to recreational drugs. a lot of people find recreational drugs interesting for whatever reason. but they also give you a really good sense of how that synaptic transmission works, information flowing across the synaptic cleft and the critical role that neurotransmitters play in how these drugs are, are having their effects by mimicking or blocking or interfering in some way with the natural way the brain works. so, you'll learn a little bit maybe about cocaine and marijuana here but you'll also learn a whole lot about synaptic transmission, and that's why i have those here. i have a wikipedia reading but i also have a neat website where you can interactively kind of learn about the brain, so another great way to, to follow up from this. alrighty, so we will continue on. our next lecture is going to, to, to talk about the whole issue of why we can suddenly get so excited when something, say, scary happens. and, and the idea that there is actually kind of a switch inside of you that can switch you from being relaxed to ready and how the brain relates to all that. alright, see you in the next one. have a great day. bye-bye.
alright, so, you know a bit about the brain, now what i want to do in this lecture is, is show you the really interesting connection that the brain has with the rest of the body. let's go right to it. alright, so. in this image you see the brain and you see the spinal cord here. these parts of our bodies are what we refer to as the central nervous system. the central nervous system is the real decision making part of us. of course most of the complex decisions are, are performed by the brain itself and we're going to spend a lot of time talking about that and the various parts of it, and the sorts of decisions those parts are responsible for, but even the spinal cord can control some things, specifically reflexes. you know when the doctor taps your knee and your leg kicks out. that reflexive action happens somewhere in the spinal cord and the brain really has nothing to do with it at all. so we kind of combine, it's kind of like we imagine the brain extending within your spinal cord. and all of this we call the central nervous system. what we're going to focus on in this lecture though is everything you see in blue on this slide. don't worry about all the, all the words you see over here, all the specific terminology. i'm not going to be worried about that. but this is the system, it's called the peripheral nervous system. and it's the system that links the brain to the rest of the body. so specifically, especially to the muscles and to our internal organs. so really it is the connection the brain has to control the rest of the body. now if we think about the peripheral nervous system in detail. and, and i'll demonstrate to you, this all to you by the end of this lecture. we can first of all kind of divide it into two parts. there's the somatic system. now, the somatic system is the system that allows us to take intentional or voluntary control over our muscles and organs, and that, well, organs, well, some people, some people can do things like slow their heart rate and, and, and well, we all can to some extent but especially the muscles, really. controlling the body through the muscles. the autonomic system, think of autonomic as kind of like automatic. this is a system that reacts predominantly to the stimuli in our environment and it kind of does one or two things. it puts our body into one of two different modes, and those modes are called the parasympathetic. and the sympathetic. so i'm using this light switch analogy here because to some extent that's kind of what the autonomic system is. it can flip our body from one mode to another. okay, what am i talking about. well, let's do it because i think this is kind of cool actually, when you get into it. alright, so let's, let's do the following. let's say you had a hard day at work. you come home you've had your dinner, you made your dinner, you did your dishes, and now it's relaxation time, so you sit on the couch, you relax, you watch some tv. let's call it couch potato mode well when you're in that sort of couch potato mode it's the sympathetic mode that kind of takes over in your body. and this sympathetic mode has the goal of keeping your body healthy and alive for the long-term. so, it will do things like this. first of all, it constricts the pupil. that's just a normal part of relaxation. but it stimulates salivation, so you get a little more saliva in your mouth. it in, it slows the heart, inhibit sounds a little strong here, but it slows your heart rate, it slows your breathing rate, and it stimulates a bunch of digestive processes. so, in a sense, what it's doing is, taking that food you just ate and it's. it's ratcheting up those processes that take the nutrients out of the food, and it delivers those nutrients to the, to the body. while separating out the waste, and disposing of the waste, you know. filling the bladder and, and, basically, you know, getting rid of all of the waste in the food, so, kind of think of this like maintenance on your house. you know, every now and then the house gets a little dirty and you gotta pull out the vacuum cleaner and clean things up and, and, you know, get the house back to where it's supposed to be. that's kind of what the parasympathetic system is doing. when it's relaxation time. it's delivering nutrients to all of the muscles and getting rid of the waste. and that's perfectly fine unless there's something urgent. okay, so specifically imagine you're sitting on that couch chilled out, relaxing but then suddenly you, you see out of the corner of your eye somebody run by your window. in your backyard, and they have a gun. okay? and let's say you know that your doors are unlocked. and so suddenly you have an emergency on your hands. what happens to your, you know, nice little chilled-out state? well, a bunch of things happen. first of all, your pupil will become larger, allowing more light in. that gives you a better view of what's around you. your mouth will become dry. that's a, that's part of the digestive system shutting down. in a sense your body's saying, you know what? don't worry about all that nutrition stuff right now, we have a real problem. your, lungs will relax, but what that really means is you'll start breathing harder. so you'll get more oxygen, your heart rate will beat faster. so you'll start taking that oxygen into your blood and delivering it to your muscles. your digestive activity will shut down. you will have sugar released by the liver. again sugar also provides strength and energy to the muscles and basically all of this stuff about getting rid of waste shuts down. so, it's, it's literally like, okay, forget about digestion, forget about all that long term survival thing, we have a short term survival issue. and so what the body is doing, is delivering this sugar and oxygen rich blood to all the muscles. and it's making you ready for action. you know, if you've every heard any of those stories about mothers that are able to pick up cars because their children are, are trapped underneath. that's the sympathetic nervous system. it gives you that strength. it gives you that energy. and it's automatic, okay? you don't have to sit on the couch and go, oh there's an intruder with a gun. okay, lemme get myself kind of psyched up here. no. it doesn't happen that way. it goes bang. you suddenly feel it. all kicks in. you get up. you get ready. and, wh, what are you getting ready for, by the way? well you are getting ready to either fight or to flee. right? you have, and both of those require muscles. so if you're going to take on this intruder, you need the strength to take them on. if you're going to choose to get the heck out of there, then you need the strength to get the heck out of there, and that's what the body's all about in sympathetic moment. it's about short term survival. so really fascinating, we have like i say, this switch where we can go almost instantaneously from relaxed to energized. it's not quite as instantaneous going back. that takes a little while longer, perhaps as you slowly go into a more relaxed state. so, i don't really want to imply these are like two sides of a coin, they're more like two ends of a continuum, but you can get from one end to the other pretty quickly. the cool thing is, that it's sort of every things the opposite in these two modes. all of these things we're pointing out move in opposite directions. digestion slowing down, activation, you know, speeding up, et cetera, et cetera. alright so you've got that. let me actually go backwards for a second here. so we did the autonomic nervous system and you got the sense that there's this switch. but that's not the whole story. there's the somatic system that can also play a role. it can only play a limited role in some cases, but it can play a role. so let me give you an example of that now. so here we, here we have a nice beautiful casserole. so let me give you a story to put this in context. let's say i have been invited to a potluck dinner with my friends. i am a vegetarian, and so i see this as an opportunity. this is an opportunity to show my meat eating friends, that in fact vegetarian food can be pretty good. it can be really good. [laugh] did i just say, pretty good. alright so, let's say i spend all day working really hard cooking this beautiful vegetarian casserole that you see right here. you know, maybe a nice spicy black bean casserole. and it's in the oven, it's just about ready, it's time to take it out of the oven. that's the setup okay, so now let me, let me actually switch to the other camera and act something out for you. alright so here we go i may kind of come in and out of the camera a little bit. where did my casserole go, i had a casserole here oh yes, i forgot, i, i made it like those tv shows. this is my cassarole. okay? so i'm going to put my casserole in the oven right now. and let's say, hm, how am i going to do this? okay. let's say i, i put my oven mitts on because it's hot. but i forget that this oven mitt has a hole in it. okay? so i forget all about that. i reach into the, the oven, and i am now bringing the casserole. now at this point my, that hole starts to allow the heat in, and i'm starting to feel intense pain. okay, that kicks in my sympathetic nervous system. i'm like, so all those things we talked about are kicking into gear. but as that happens what, what my sympathetic nervous system will start doing is sending signals to my muscles to say let go. so let's say they send an excitatory signal to certain muscle groups that would, if that was all that was going on, open my hands and drop my casserole. but wait, i don't want to drop that casserole. i spent all day, this casserole means a lot to me. so at that point, that's when my somatic system kicks in. and it might do the following, it might from my brain send a signal to those same muscles but inhibitory ones, so it will fight the signal that's being sent by the autonomic nervous system. and it will say, oh no you don't. don't drop that. hold on to it. and it might at the same time send an excitatory signal to my leg. and it would say, no hold onto it, get your butt over to that table as quick as you can, and so you see this sort of look. but while the person's doing that, they bring it somewhere, drop it, and they go ahhh, [noise]. and they take care of their hand, okay? alright. a little silly, perhaps. but that moment, where you have those two signals let's. let's go back to the other slide now. alright. so that moment, where you have the sympathetic nervous system sending an excitatory signal to the muscles, but then the somatic system counters that. okay? and literally now, we have a bit of a fight going on. the somatic system can only keep up that fight so long. okay? the, the sympathetic nervous system will win. but if it keeps it up long enough, and especially if it sends activation to the leg muscles to get you to a place where you can put that down, then everything works out, okay? so that example and you've probably been in that situation yourself. that gives you a really good sense of this peripheral nervous system and how it all plays out in terms of the brain trying to control the body. okay. so, i hope that was kind of fun for you. it's fun for me. i'm still breathing there. okay. i've got some some more things for you to follow up. there's a video that kind of brings you through the nervous system in a little bit more detail. so you can check that out. i threw in a, a nice recipe for a spicy black bean casserole. just in case i made you hungry and you wanted to try out some vegetarian cuisine. i also have a reading for you about the nervous system and a nice active learning experience. so this is a website where you can learn a little more about the nervous system and take quizzes. really good active learning, so i encourage you to try that out as well. alrighty, so, that's the, peripheral nervous system, so we have the brain, we have the peripheral nervous system. let's take it from there.
alright. so now, i'm going to feel like a little bit of a tour guide because over the next, actually, five lectures, i am going to take you on a tour of your brain. so our first stop will actually be the middle of the brain. and i, i think that's a good first stop because that's the most primitive brain structures. and so, let's start primitive and, and kind of go civilized, shall we? off to primitive. alright. so, week 2 lecture 3 subcortical regions of the brain. what do i mean by subcortical? well, first of all, we talked about all this wrinkled part on the outside of the brain. all of this is the cortex, the cortical regions and we're going to have a lot to say about cortical regions. but these all are kind of like the mushroom cap that sits upon a stem of a sort. and so, in the lecture today, we're going to talk about some of these regions. and i think it's, again, a good place to start because these are the very oldest parts of the brain. in fact, sometimes, this is referred to as the reptilian brain because literally if you look across species, even you know, all the way to, say, reptiles, you see these basic structures there in just about every species. so, it shouldn't be surprising then that the, the role these structures play are primarily ones involved with basic life support, really. so, for example, if we sort of work our way up the brainstem, it's like the spinal cord, we hit on the early part of the brainstem, something called the medulla. the medulla really takes care of things like our heart rate and our blood pressure and our respiration. so, just kind of synchronizing all those aspects to make sure, essentially, that enough oxygen and nutrients are flowing, flowing to our body. so, it's really taking control of, of that, you know, basic housekeeping function and keeping everything working well at that level. when we work up a little bit we get to the pons. this is kind of a fascinating area and we will have a lecture later all about sleep because sleep is a fascinating thing. and, and sleep is a case where that when we go to sleep, the neurochemicals in our brain really change quite dramatically. there's a whole shift. it really is an altered state of consciousness. and it's the pons that regulate all of that and regulate our general sleep wake cycles through the day. so, when you're feeling really tired, it's because the pons are kind of signalling parts of your brain that release chemicals that make you feel that way. so, that's the pons' job, really, is to work on our alertness and generally to every now and then make us desire sleep and then to regulate the changes in our brain that happen during sleep. so, sleep is a bit of a mystery. it's a hard thing to study scientifically but every animal does it. it must be important in some way, and clearly, you know, the part of our brain that regulates it, is part of this very primitive structure. as you move up, you get to what some people call the midbrain areas. and in those areas, you get a lot of control over things like sexual motivations, aggressive motivations, and again, you know, sex and aggression in, in the animal world especially well, in our world, too. face it now, aggression, we try to keep under wraps a little bit. but if we think about a more primitive society and, and primitive animals, let's say, the way sex typically works with animals, sex and aggression tend to be pretty linked. typically with animals, a female goes into a heat for a short period of time when they are ovulating. and then that period of time, the female will be receptive to almost any male. and just about every male will find a female in heat attractive. and so typically, a female in heat causes aggression in males. there becomes a competition over access to the females. and, of course, whoever wins or loses that competition, that's often critical for the hierarchical organization that those animals ultimately produce you know, they enter into. and so all of that, those sexual aggression behaviors are controlled by part of the mid brain up here so, you know, kind of fascinating. think of, think of those basic things that keep the body alive and keep survival processes happening. that's all happening in the brainstem area really. and now, just to the right of the brainstem here, you see the cerebellum. in this slide, you see it along the bottom here. it's this little part that sticks out from our brain. now, the cerebellum is actually very fascinating. and, and when we get up and talk about the cortical regions, i'll tell you that a lot of our motor activity is initiated by a strip of brain tissue that we'll call motor cortex. the cerebellum is kind of the next stop along the way. the cerebellum allows our motor behavior to be really graceful. i think very often, we don't fully appreciate how gracefully we do interact with the world, even things like going up stairs. and, and we quickly find the height of the stairs and we just barely clear that with our feet, or as we walk around corners. i don't know, if you've ever noticed this, but in canada at least when fall comes and we start wearing our heavier coats, i will often notice at that time that when i go around a corner, my coat is rubbing on the corners as i go across. so, obviously i have so little clearance between my body and the, and the corner, that once i add, you know, a centimeter or two of thickness, now i rub and, and touch that. so, the cerebellum really does orchestrate that really nice tight tuning of the body. and when there's problems in the cerebellum, you see a lot of jerky, uncoordinated kind of movement. so, very important for fluid motion, precise motion which, of course, also has survival value associated with it. but now, the parts that i really want to talk about today are parts that make up what we call the limbic system. there's, there's, there's a lot of fun in the limbic system and, and i'm going to be a little selective about what i talk about here. this tangle of nerve fibers, we've seen before, this is called the corpus callosum. this is the major connection between the two hemispheres of the brain. this is how most of the information goes back and forth through this corpus callosum. the last lecture in this series in, in this week, i will talk about patients who have had their corpus callosum severed and therefore, they essentially have two independent brains within their brain and there's some really fascinating cool data that comes out of those studies. so, i'm going to leave that a little bit until then. and in fact, the what i really want to focus on are two of these things, the amygdala and the hippocampus, because these are both very fascinating structures that are part of the limbic system. let's start with the amygdala. the amygdala is, to some extent, our spider senses. that notion that if you're, if you're a spiderman fan at all, there's that idea that every now and then, spiderman can sense danger. there's danger around him somehow and he feels his spider senses tingling is what they will typically say. well, you and i have a spider sense and it's the amygdala that underlies it all. so, essentially, any time we're in an environment and our brain perceives danger of any sort, it's the amygdala that is essentially our early warning system. it's, like, all the stimulae goes through the amygdala and the amygdala's job is to constantly be on the lookout for danger. and when it senses danger, well, guess what it does? it kicks in the sympathetic nervous system. remember that switch? so, when the amygdala senses danger, then that switch gets flipped. our heart beat starts speeding up, our breathing speeds up, we get anxious, we sweat, you know, all of that stuff happens. so, the amygdala is literally the switch that i talked about or it's at least the brain structure that flips that switch. and obviously a very critical role. if you remove the amygdala from an animal, it gets very easy going, very chilled out, which kind of sounds nice. however, if you remove the amygdala from a mouse, it's also chilled out when predators are around. that's not so good, right? that shows you the function of the amygdala, is that it warns us, hey, wake up, get ready, there's danger. you've got to be, you've got to be ready for it. now it can also be a problem, of course, because if it triggers too easily, then we can feel like we're in danger when we're not. and that can give rise to things like panic attacks. so, panic attacks ultimately at their core are caused by the amygdala as well. now, notice the amygdala is very close to the hippocampus. the hippocampus, that kind of means small sea horsey thing. it, it's this curvy c shapes structure that goes into one, one side of the brain and also into the other side of the brain. so, it's got this funky little shape to it. what it is critical for, we now know well, is laying down our conscious memories. if you have your hippocampus removed, then you will have trouble consciously remembering anything that happens to you after that, which is not to say you can't learn. you'll still be able to learn, but you will never consciously remember learning. so,if you've, if you've seen a movie like momento, for example, or have heard of any amnesic where, you know, the story goes like this. you meet the amnesic, you talk to them, but if you leave the room and come back, they won't know who you are anymore. there are those sorts of amnesics, and they all have damage to their hippocampal region. so, the hippocampus really keeps our memories, our, our personal, what we're going to call episodic memories. it's the structure that seems to store those memories, and without it, it's, it's like a camera that won't take any pictures in a sense. now, it's no coincidence that the amygdala and the hippocampus are so close. if you do find yourself in danger, it would be very handy, assuming you survive the danger, that you remember the conditions that were just before the danger appeared. because if you do, that will allow you to potentially predict the danger if those conditions reappear. so really, this happens as a sort of circuit. anytime the amygdala goes off and starts that whole sympathetic nervous system activity, it also stimulates the hippocampus, which seems to store information about what was happening just before the danger, thereby helping us to predict subsequent dangers. so again, think of this. this is all in the very primitive part of the brain. it's sophisticated to some extent. you know, its underlying conscious memory and escaping from danger but really it is about that short-term survival. so, we have, you know, some part of the brain doing that kind of housekeeping stuff but these parts of the brain are really trying to keep us alive when we're in danger and allowing us to avoid danger in the future. in a nutshell then, that's the kind of thing that these subcortical regions do. they, they work on keeping us alive allowing us to survive. i've got some other things. there's a nice anatomical tour of the hippocampus and the amygdala. check that out. and there's a whole cool 3d brain tour. this will go beyond this lecture a little bit, but good to check out because we'll be, what we'll be talking about subsequently will follow along nicely. and remember what i told you about the amygdala and panic attacks. it's also relaxed to anxiety in general. that, that whole sympathetic nervous system activity, it's meant to be short-lived. the notion is it's supposed to help you escape some immediate danger. but what if you go to work and every day, you feel like you're going to get fired? so, every day, you feel like you're under threat. well, your amygdala can be stimulated by that, and that can cause your sympathetic nervous system to be constantly engaged. you can feel constant anxiety, which is very poor for your health. so, this video will explore that a little bit. if you've ever had a panic attack or you feel anxious, check that out, that should be very informative for you. i've got some, some readings as well, a reading devoted to the primitive brain, the reptilian brain. and another one that focuses more on the hippocampus, because it's such a fascinating part of the brain and we'll be coming back to it, okay? so, that's the, the subcortical regions and from here, we're going to go, we're going to take the elevator, go up to the cortex. i'll see you up there.
well, i thought if i was playing the role of tour guide, then it only made sense that i maybe dressed up a little bit for you. and notice by the way i've actually, like, well, you'll notice in a second that i've worn a shirt that matches the slides. how many other mood guides do that kind of, you know, give you that kind of service? [laugh]. all right. so, we were in the, in the sort of lower subcortical regions of the brain. we're now going to move to the cortex. so, we're kind of going to go, move up. but in this case, back, right to the sort of back of the skull and we're going to explore an area called the occipital lobes. and while we're there, we'll learn a few general principles of brain functioning. let's do it. all right? week 2, lecture 4, the occipital lobe. yeah, you see eyes all over the place because the occipital lobe is about vision. this gives you a sense of where we're talking about, right at the very back of the brain. and, and literally, it seems kind of, always seemed odd, to me at least as a student that, you know, visual input that's coming in from the eyes, would actually processed way back here, the the tract would go through the entire brain before it got to the part processed it. but, for whatever reasons, that's, that's how our brains are wired. so, we have this visual information coming in. it follows the optic nerve. it passes through this interesting area called the lateral geniculate nucleus, often just acronymed as lgn. the lateral geniculate nucleus is interesting because a lot of our sensory information goes through it. and you know, once supposition is that this is what kind of prioritizes what we are attending to at any given moment, via vision sound, taste, touch, et cetera. but once it goes through the latterogenic nucleus, it then goes on to, first what we're going to call, primary visual cortex. and then, more and more there, there's different visual areas. so, the information kind of starts at the very back here, in this primary cortex and then, moves forward through the brain up to what we call association cortex or secondary cortex. so, this is one interesting distinction i, i want to use this lecture for. it's a distinction between what we're going to call sensation and what we're going to call perception. it's always a tricky distinction for students to get, but, but i hope i'll be able to make it clear for you. the primary visual cortex is getting the raw input from the world. so, just you know, literally the information from the eyes is going right here. and if you had damage to, to this area, what would literally, what you would feel phenomenologically is that you had like a black spot on, almost like you know, if you took my glasses and stuck a sticker on it somewhere. so that, that visual information just wasn't getting in, any information that hit that. that's what it would feel like if if some of your neural tissue here was damaged. you would have what we call a scotoma, literally kind of a black spot that followed your vision anywhere you looked. so, it's really about the basic visual information. but as we move up through cortical areas, it becomes more about the interpretation of that visual information. because if you take a moment and look look at introspect on your raw visual input, and ask yourself, kind of, as you look around, how many whole and complete objects do i see? chances are, most of the objects, as you look around your world, will be either occluded by other objects, you know, something's in front of them, so really you're only seeing part of it. or for one reason or another you know, maybe it would be peeking out around a corner, something like that. we very seldom get these really clean presentations of things to us. the world presents stimulaty imbedded in noise. i've mentioned that before. so, perception is about taking that raw input and figuring out what's really there. and that requires, of course, knowledge about objects. requires memory. you know, literally, you have to have seen some of these objects before in order to be able to recognize them when you only see a portion of them. so, there's this fine interplay between raw sensory input and memory that leads to what we call perception. okay. so, let's get into that a little bit. and i want to give you that with this example. this is an example that i've used in my class for years. most of you, i suspect, can read this perfectly fine. the cat in the hat. now what's interesting about this example is all of the h's and all of the a's are in fact the exact same stimulus. so, if you look at this h, for example, and this a i have literally copied and pasted that same stimulus here and of course in hat. right back to back, the h and the a. and yet sometimes even though it is always the same raw input, sometimes we see it, that is we perceive it, as either an h or an a. right? here, it looks like an h. here, it looks like an a. why? well, this shows the richness that, that goes on in the brain as we take a raw input and then start to interpret it. there's issues like context, right? there's the letters around it. now literally, you know, if you take something like tae kwon do this could be tae. you know, from some perspectives that would be a reasonable stimulus. but even then tae, if even we think of the bigger per- perceptual thing, if this had said kwon and this had said do, then we could probably see that as an a. but this says cat in the hat. and so now, the, i just sounded like william shatner there. the cat in the hat. sorry, i had a little william shatner sharing with a canadian moment. but with that context, all of that context. so, our brain is taking in this raw input, but it's taking it in and it's combining it all and ultimately trying to make sense out of the noisy input. and that's what the brain does really, really well. and so, ultimately it doesn't matter to the brain that these letters look the same visually. it will perceive them differently because it will make them fit with previous experiences. we don't know a word cht but we know a word cat. and so, it makes more sense to the brain to see that as an a. okay, that sensation verses perception. we'll run into that in other parts of the course, but this is a good chance to introduce it. now, there's weird things that can happen when this process gets blocked in some ways. there's a form of of visual impairment yeah, acquired brain disorder called visual agnosia. for visual agnos-, agnos-, for someone suffering from visual agnosia, their vision is still fine. they can see things perfectly well but what they have problems with is that interpretation process i've just been talking about. so in one classic example, a patient was shown a glove. they were shown something like this. they weren't allowed to touch it, they were just shown it from a distance, so all they had was visual information. and they were asked, what do you think this is? and so, the patient looked at it very carefully and said something like hmm, let me see. well, it's got these little pouches here. so it's like some sort of purse thing, maybe, that people could carry with little pouches. i know, maybe they put coins of different sizes in these different pouches. okay. so, what this patient is doing is trying to figure this out. they, they see it perfectly fine. the visual input is there. but it's the trying to put that visual inf-, information together into something that makes sense. and sometimes they will get confused. they will figure things out and they will go down a wrong path, like that patient i just told you about. now, if you gave her this, if you let her feel it. then, immediately she'd grab it and probably, oh put it on her hand and go, oh yeah, it's a glove. you know, the tactile sense, senses can figure out what it is. but the visual sense cannot. so, kind of a fascinating thing. now, there, there's a, a famous book on this by a neuropsychologist named oliver sacks. and that book is called, the man who mistook his wife for a hat. the title of that book, the book is full of a bunch of short stories of different forms of brain damage and the phenomenology they produce. fascinating book, i highly recommend it. in the case of the man who mistook his wife for a hat, he was literally meeting with doctor sacks. and then on his way out, he was looking for his hat, and his wife was still sitting on the couch, and her hair looked hat-like to him. so, he reached out and grabbed her head mistaking his wife for a hat. so, you know, that's the title story of that book and it's all about visual agnosia. if you are interested, check that out. all right. so, you know, quick little tour of the occipital lobe and we're going to continue this with the various other parts of the brain. here's some other things for you to check out. here's a video about sensation and perception to ,again, try to highlight that distinction more and make that more clear to you. this one is kind of, i threw this in kind of funny. this is obviously a school project. there's two young girls describing the occipital lobe and what it does. when i looked at this, it had about 100 hits. so i thought it would be kind of funny to mention it to you guys and, and maybe, you know, pump that up 10,000 or 20,000 or so. because i suspect the little girls would get quite a kick out of it and their classroom would too. so, a fun example that, hey, when you put something on the internet, the world is watching. so, if you feel so inclined, check it out. there's some good information there too. they do a good job. this is a link to tell you more about the man who mistook his wife for a hat. i would suggest that if you want to read something along with the course, this is a great want, thing to read because it's short little stories. you can read one before you go to bed... and really, by learning about weird things that happen when, when there's damage to the brain, you learn a lot about what those parts of the brain normally do for most of us. so, so, really good, check it out. and then here's a website that's more about the occipital lobe itself. gives you a little bit more information about that. so check that out and we will continue the tour.
hey, i feel the need to explain. that where is it, okay. that last, second last letter is supposed to be an a, temporal, temporal lobes that's what we're going to talk about. i tried to make it look like an ear. i failed miserably. i'm not an artist. i'm a, i'm a prof. but there, there you go, temporal lobe. we're going to continue our tour. we're basically, we were at the back of the brain. and now, what we're going to do is move forward basically to an area kind of under our ears. which is not really coincidental. this one makes a little bit more sense than the occipital does because the temporal lobes is primarly devoted to our ability to perceive sounds of different sorts. so, let's take the tour. hop on the little train, make our way up to the temporal lobes. here we go. week 2: lecture 5, the temporal lobe. so, i say temporal lobe but, but, you know, let me make clear that you know, the brain does have this separate hemisphere kind of thing. so, like the occipital lobe there's literally two occipital lobes, there's two temporal lobes, there's going to be two parietal lobes, there's going to be two frontal lobes. and in fact, that will become relevant in this lecture because sometimes the lobe, the lobes on each side of the brain do slightly different things. so, let's get there. so, first of all though, let's just be clear about where we were. so, we started in the occipital lobe, and our, and our tour of this brain has now taken us forward to this area, roughly under our ears. now, it's kind of interesting, like the occipital lobe, the temporal lobe has a primary sensory part and association part. the primary sensory part is, is sort of inside. it's these dark green areas here. so, it's kind of folded within the brain a little bit. but it's the same story there that if you had damage anywhere to the cortical tissue in here, you would actually have auditory problems. there are perhaps frequencies you wouldn't hear. so, you know, this again, is really the area that's taking the primary sensory input from the world, the primary sounds. and then, passing it along to other areas that then do more in-depth processing of what it actually is we're hearing. so, they do more of the recognition process, rather than the reception. you can kind of think of it that way, sensation, perception. sensation is kind of receiving the signal. perception is now trying to recognize what it is that you're hearing, in this case, by matching those sounds up to sounds we've known in the past. okay, so memory, again, is playing a big role here. i like this particular figure, because it also allows me to highlight that these areas that we're defining are more or less defined by these sulci and fissures of the brain that we were talking about earlier. so, you notice the parietal lobe, that we have this thing called the, sorry, the occipital lobe. the preoccipital notch, here. there's this little area here, where, you know, from here back, it's, it's, it's considered the occipital lobe. from here forward, it's considered the temporal lobe. now, we do cut across some gyri here. cutting across that one as well, so it's not a perfect, you know, it's not like the brain comes in, in four little chunks. but it does seem as though, you can define areas based on these fissures, and that, that the definition makes a little sense. you know, that, that it is the areas within that do seem focused on specific areas. i'm also though, going to challenge that a little bit, or i'm at least going to show that sometimes we'll focus on certain areas. if there's an area between the two different lobes, that usually makes sense too. it's usually performing some function that's a mix of what the two lobes do. we're going to get a taste of that. alright. so, let's, let's move on. you know what we're talking about now and, and by the way, you see that these gyruses and sulci, they all have fancy names like this. again, i'm not going to worry about too much terminology wise, but i present it just you know, to be as clear as possible. alright, so now we get into that issue of laterality, it's what it's called. now, you have heard this before, i'm sure, the notion that we, we talk about certain people being left brained or certain people being right brained. and the notion is that the left side of our brain is much more analytic, the right side of our brain is much more creative. and the claims is that for certain individuals, maybe one or the other side of the brain dominates somehow. so, they're either more analytic people or they're more creative people. i, i honestly believe that it's sometimes very much overblown in the popular literature popular, popular media. the, the reality is that the brain is connected by that corpus callosum, and that information flows so quickly between the two sides of the brain that the brain really does function as a unitary whole. but that said, there are times when what the left side oft the brain is doing is different from what the right side of the brain is doing. and that's where all this laterality notion comes from. one of the most dramatic examples is in case, is in fact, right here in the temporal lobes. and it's the distinction between language processing versus sound processing, non, non-verbal processing let's say, non-verbal sounds. so, let's look at the left side. so, we now, you know, this person, this individual is facing to, to all of our. i had to figure out if it was mine or, or all of our. to all of our left. and we're looking at now, the left side of their brain. now, remember the primary cortex is folded in here. and we have the, the temporal area is right around here. now, to the back of that temporal area is wernicke's area. and to the front and actually sneaking into the frontal lobes here is broca's area. we've talked about broca's area before. this is the area where if patients had damage to this area, they could not produce spoken speech. and one of the things you'll notice is that when we get through talking about the frontal lobes, is there's a strip here that we're going to call the motor strip. and this is the, the part of the brain that sends signals to the body to command it to move. and if you actually think of language, producing language is all about that, it's all about using the muscles in your, in your throat, using air from your lungs, using your mouth and your tongue, and everything in your mouth to shape sound. and so, it is a very motor process. and that's why, you know, even though broca's area is primarily devoted to speech, which is, you know, it sounds like an like an auditory thing, it's, it's devoted to the production of speech. so, it's a little more in the motor areas. wernickes, however, is devoted to the reception of speech. so, people with damage to this area have trouble understanding speech. they have trouble, if you spoke to them, they, they wouldn't know what you're saying. they might be able to produce speech perfectly fine, if their broca's area is fine. but they couldn't comprehend speech. that's a big part of what the left hemisphere does. it takes this raw auditory sound and it's like the left is always looking for language kinds of sounds, and passing them to wernicke's area, and then decoding them. so, the left is very much about language. and of course, we use language for a lot of our thinking. or at least, we feel like we hear, you know, ourselves talking in our minds. and that's why, that's one of the reasons people say the left brain is the more analytical. that when we're thinking about things, it's a wernicke's area. we, we literally do, by the way, talk to ourselves. when, when we think about things, broca's area is lighting up a little bit,and wernicke's area is lighting up a little bit. we are literally talking to ourselves in our mind. and, you know, that seems like, usually we do that when we're trying to figure stuff out or sort things out. so, that's sort of why people say this is analytical. now, if we look more at the, at the right side of the brain. so now, we're looking here at a top looking from the top at the left and the right of a brain. and we have the temporal lobes highlighted here. what this is showing is that if you give people a task where they're supposed to listen to music like sounds and figure out either the tonal structure what which, which is all about sort of what key a piece is in. or they're worried about pitch patterns. is it going up in pitch or down in pitch? or pitch intervals. how many steps up in pitch or down in pitch? or this really kind of odd thing called timbre. timbre is [sound] it's, it's really kind of hard to describe. but if you play a certain note on both the guitar and a piano, they sound different because of the overtones that come from the specific instrument. and so, they sound like a guitar or like a piano. and so, if you give people tasks where they're supposed to work on things like this, music-like sounds, then the areas that you see being involved in that tend to be on the right side of the brain. and so, this is that interesting now, distinction we have where language seems to be a left side of the brain thing. but musical perception seems to be a right side of the brain thing. and of course, music we think of as more creative, you know, creative based. so, hence that notion of the analytical versus the creative side of the brain. but again, let me always stress, these two talk. and they talk very quickly and, and very fluently. so, you know, literally when we interact, like imagine something like listening to hip hop or spoken word where, where there is musical component, but there is also a linguistic component. you know, virtually any singer, song writer. we're, we're very able to combine those two things, very fluently. but it does seem like separate parts of the brain are doing their own separate bits which is really kind of fascinating. alright. this, of course, has, has grown. we're going to see other examples of laterality. we didn't in the, in the occipital lobe, we don't see anything dramatic like that in the occipital lobe. but we will see some others as we continue our tour. especially on the prime and the lobe. and i just kind of threw this in because this is more of a public perception of the left brain and the right brain. and the left brain does all this kind of stuff. analysis, logic, lists, number, words, lines, you know, hence your analytic kind of side. whereas the right side of the brain is doing this bigger kind of stuff. colors, daydreaming, 3d, rhythm, imagination, synthesis. i can't help but mention here, there's, there's a book about, it's called a stroke of inside. a book about a brain. a researcher who suffers a stroke. and her claim is that it's actually kind of, that strokes are not painful and they're actually kind of nice in a way because strokes usually hit the left side of the brain and they usually shut down a lot of these functions. so, suddenly you stop with all your day to day worries. and instead, you get this, in her opinion, oneness with the universe kind of feeling, when the right brain really dominates, because the left brain's getting hit. so, she describes this situation where she knows something's wrong. she knows that she's suffering some sort of traumatic issue with her brain. but it kind of feels good. she kind of feels like she's losing all the worries of the world and becoming in touch with the oneness of the universe. and it's really hard for her, in that state, to continue the process of trying to get help. because she keeps coming back to that nice feeling. so, you know, that, that'll be an interesting one for you to check out as well, if you're a reader check that book out. alrighty, so, a few other things for you here. i didn't hyperlink this, but one of my favorite bands is, is a band called rush. canadian band. way to go rush. recently inducted into the hall of fame finally. rock and roll hall of fame. but they have an album called hemisphere. which plays with this whole left brain versus right brain distinction. so, if you want to learn through music i recommend hemisphere. videos here's more on both the occipital and the temporal. so, i threw this one in, because it will allow you to combine what we've been talking about the last couple lectures. and this is a really fascinating one, this is a researcher named ramachandran. and he studies temporal lobe, epilepsy and, and the feeling that some of these epileptics have when they have a seizure, of becoming very close to god. so, there's really interesting notion of, you know, the relation between, between the temporal lobes and, and our sense and feeling of, of a presence of others and a presence of a god. so, fascinating. ramachandran, everything he does is really interesting. so, so, check that out. readings just a wikipedia thing on the temporal lobe. i threw this one in, partly for you to see how non-developed it is. i want to encourage you, as you learn more about psychology, to think every now and then about maybe updating wikipedia pages. maybe making them better, in whatever language, you know, however, not good this is in english, it's probably even less good in other languages. so, if you're fluent in another language and you want to take some of what you learn and throw it into wikipedia, you will be kind of doing what i'm doing. you're, you'll be providing information to the masses. which is kind of a cool feeling. so, i throw that for that. this last one i put this in to give you a taste of scientific publication. so, this is a journal called, laterality. so, they focus on these left-right distinctions of the brain. and they have some free articles available. some of their most popular articles. so, i thought, you know, if you're at all curious, what does it actually look like when a scientist does a study on the brain, and then reports the results? well, you can take a look and most of these are really kind of interesting, neat concepts. so, so, i threw that in there to give you that side of the whole academic progress issue. alrighty. so, there's the temporal lobe. next step will be to the very top of the brain to an area called the parietal lobe. follow me, just this way.
all right, on with the tour. we started at the back of the brain. we did the occipital lobes at the very back, moved sort of towards the ears, and did the temporal lobes. now, we're going to kind of go up but still staying near the back of the head an area that we're going to call the parietal lobes. and well, i, i think this is true of, of all parts of the brain. a really fascinating and cool part of the brain that does some really neat stuff. on with the tour. all right, so week 2 lecture 6, the parietal lobes. actually, when you see this little colored thing here you know, the parietal lobes would be this green area just so we have our geography straight. you're going to see that, you know, sometimes the way these, the, the size of these things is, is represented changes. and you'll actually see that going right from here, where i say the green is the parietal lobe. i think this is a pretty accurate representation. this would be what we're going to call the frontal lobes, and you see how much of it there is. and the parietal lobe's just sort of along the back. compared to this diagram, where the parietal lobe seems to be a lot more forward. but artistic license, i guess. but by now, of course, this should start to feel very familiar to you. you're getting to know the brain quite well. brain stem, cerebellum, occipital lobe at the back, temporal lobe under the ears. and so, yeah, now we're up here in the parietal lobe. and there's some really cool things about the brain that are really represented strongly in the parietal lobe. so we're going to learn about the brain in general while we're also learning about the parietal specifically. so, remember i said occipital lobe has primary visual cortex, temporal lobe has primary auditory cortex, so for vision that's where the raw visual stimulus came in. for for the temporal lobe that was where the raw auditory stimulus came in. well, for the parietal lobes, that primary cortex is devoted to sensation. okay, literally feelings on our body. okay? when something touches our body it, it basically activates parts of this part of the temporal lobe, something we're going to call the somatosensory cortex. some people just call it the sensory strip, or the somatosensory strip. because you see,it is kind of organized on a strip, and with the rest of the parietal lobe kind of behind it here. you also see that it's right adjacent to another strip of cortex we're going to call the motor strip. let me, let me get back to the motor strip for a second. because even though the motor strip is actually part of the frontal lobes, these things share so much in common that, that it makes sense to talk a little bit about them together. but let's start with the green area, somatosensory cortex, right here. and again, as i said, what it's doing is receiving input from the body. and in fact, you can find out exactly what part of the body relates to what part of this cortex by measuring electrical activities. so, you can literally, and of course, they typically did this in animal brains initially, you can put probes in the brain, and then you can stimulate parts of the body. and when you stimulate a part of the body related to that specific part of the brain, you will see an electrical signal. and so by moving the probe around, and touching different parts of the body, you can essentially map this somatosensory cortex, and find there exactly what parts react to what parts of the body. when you do that, this is what you find. and, and there's a couple of interesting things. so, first of all we have this weird cross-wiring going on. the left side of the brain responds to sensations on the right side of the body. and vice versa, the right side to sensations on the left side of body. so there's a little bit of what we sometimes call contra-lateral wiring, cross-wiring. why? i've never heard a good explanation. i don't know, but that's how it is. but what we also see is that the amount of brain tissue devoted to a given part of our body does not depend on the size of that part of the body, but rather on its importance, in terms of sensory input. okay? so you'll notice for example that, our facial areas are, are very strongly represented, as are our hands. our hands are what we use primarily to touch and feel things, right? there's a lot of sensory cortex, a lot of brain devoted to your hand, which gives you a very high-detailed, if you want, high resolution sensory experience with things you touch with your hand. if, if you want to get a sense of the opposite of this, well do, do the following things. first of all, let's do it with your lip, because notice, there's a lot of lips here. pinch your lip really hard. most of us won't even pinch our lips really hard, because if you pinch it too hard, it starts to hurt, right? and, and you don't want to pinch it too hard so that it starts to hurt. now do the same thing with your elbow. pinch your elbow. you can pinch your elbow as hard as you want. you don't feel a thing when you pinch your elbow. it turns out, there's really no sensory cortex devoted to your elbow. and you know, that makes sense when you think of it, because what do we do with our elbows? we, we sit on them. we put a lot of weight on them. and so we don't really want pain. we don't really want sensitivity in the elbows, but we want sensitivity in the lips, we want it in the hands, et cetera. and so you see that the amount of cortical tissue reflects that, how important that body part is for sensory input. and even things like the tongue and the mouth get a lot of tissue because we're using that to, to produce words. and yes, that's motor, it's output, but we also need to feel what's going on in there in order to shape our mouths appropriately. and so there's a lot of tissue devoted to that, too. so kind of cool. and yeah there's, there's some tissue devoted to your genitals as well. it turns out we like sensory input from those regions. in fact, sometimes by the way, this is represented in this kind of form, by something called the sensory homunculus. so this is just basically an art, artist's rendition of what we would look like if our outer bodies were proportioned according to how much brain tissue is devoted to them. and so, you see the big lips and mouth, and the big hands. in some depictions, you see much bigger genitals as well, by the way. and this is just another example of that, of that motor strip. now, i'm very quickly, we're going to come back to it. .but i'm very quickly just going to highlight that this strip actually belongs to the frontal lobe. so we'll talk about it in detail next lecture. but it's really going to tell the same kind of story. again, the left side corresponds to the right side of the body. but in this case, it's not about sensory input, but about motor output. so this strip when, when i move my hand, that signal originates somewhere. so it's literally, a part of this cortex gets active, and that makes my hand move. so this is what outputs behavior, this is what inputs sensory input. but otherwise again, you see the motor strip also has that representational thing. it does have an elbow. it's good to move your elbow a little bit. but really the same kind of story, input versus output. so i'll just mention that quick. all right, now there's also another interesting aspect of the parietal lobe that's related to laterality. remember, the temporal lobe, language versus other sounds. in the parietal lobe, it seems as though the left and the right are, are focused on body and world respectively. so literally, in order, if you think for a while, in order to move around the world effectively, you really have to know two things. you have to know, where is my body, and you have to know, where are things in the world? because in a sense, you can think of your body as the vehicle. you have to move this vehicle through the world. you have to negotiate it. and in order to do that effectively, you need to know where the vehicle is, you need to know where things are in the world. and it kind of seems as though the brain is lateralized in accord with that. let me give you a couple of examples. this, once again, is oliver sacks, the neural psychologist. and once again, in his book, the man who mistook his wife for a hat, he's got a different story about a woman who's lost her ability to, to sense something we call proprioception. what's proprioception? it's this weird sixth sense, as it were, that we have about where parts of our body are at any given moment. so it, you know, think for a second. just sit where you are, relax, and now let me ask you the following question. what does your left big toe feel like right now? and notice that you can kind of mentally move to your left big toe. you can kind of feel the position it's in, what it's doing. move to your right buttock. what does it feel like right now? what sensation is on it? we can kind of move mentally through our whole body, and have a feeling where our body parts are. and again we do really take that for granted, but it can get really odd when you lose that. so in the story oliver sacks tells, he tells of a patient who woke up in the middle of the night, and to her horror, there was a human leg in bed with her. and this is like godfather, with a horse head in the bed. there's a human leg in the bed with her, and it horrifies her. so, she does what maybe many of us would do. she grabs the leg, and throws it out of the bed. now the problem is, it was her leg. and she went tumbling out of the bed after it, because it turns out, legs weigh quite a bit. but it didn't seem like her leg, because she couldn't feel it from the inside, for lack of a better term. that sounds really weird to us, but really you've probably experienced it. if, if you're like most people, you've fallen asleep sometime with your hand over your head like this [sound]. so you're asleep. all the blood drains out of your arm. when that happens you might wake up, and you might see this hand, and it might freak you out at first. because it doesn't seem like it's your hand, because when the blood all drains, you become like that patient. you can't feel this from the inside. and so it freaks you out. like, what the heck, where'd that come from? same idea. it's not my hand. but most of us realize oh, that is our hand. and you've probably also had the feeling of grabbing that hand and lifting it up, and moving it somewhere. and it feels like this heavy ton of, of stuff that you hadn't intended to drop. that's what life would feel like without proprioception. and, and that's what the left part of the parietal lobe seems to deal with, handling where our body is all the time, sensing. more sensing than, than moving, of course, because that'll be frontal. but sensing where the parts of our body are all the time. that seems to be the left. the right seems to more focused on the world, the outer world. what's out there? and in fact there's, there's some interesting odd cases of what happens when the right parietal lobe is damaged. so when the left is damaged, you lose proprioception. when the right is damaged, it seems as though people lose the ability to sense the world properly. specifically, they show something called unilateral visual neglect. if you gave patients these figures and you said, hey, can you please draw these? they would draw them, but you would note this common bias in the sense that, the right side of the figures, they copy with pretty good detail. but the left side, they tend to leave a bunch of stuff out. in fact, it's kind of like, with a lot of these studies, it's like they just don't see things on the left. the funny story i remember that, that always stuck in my head, is if you give one of these patients a plate of food, they will quite often eat all the food on the right side of the plate and put their utensils down. now why do they do that? are they full? well, it turns out, if you just spin the plate, they will go, oh, and then they will eat the rest of their food. so they weren't really full. it's just kind of like, and they're not blind to the left side, but they, we talk about it as an intentional phenomenon. it's just like they never attend to it, and they don't kind of notice it's there. a fascinating thing. but again, it points to the fact that this part of the brain is somehow taking the parts of our world, and giving us this perception of what's out there. but when that part of the brain is damaged, that perception is damaged too. now, it always tends to be the left side of the world that gets lost. haven't heard a good explanation for that, too, which, which by the way this is a good point for me to mention. remember me talking about how young psychology was as a science? well, it is very young, especially with you know, really good scientific techniques being applied to it. and, so, there's still a lot of points in this course, where i will do things like this, and say, you know, it's only the left side. we don't know why yet. and for me, that makes it kind of cool. it's, it's like, you know, i'm not telling you all these laws and facts. i'm telling you about data and ideas, what we think is going on, but we got a long way to go. and, and again, i think that makes it a lot of fun. all right, so, if you'd like to learn more about the parietal lobes, well, first of all generally, here's oliver sacks giving a ted talk. so he will talk about a number of different brain regions, and a, and a number of the patients who have suffered damages to the regions, and the things they show. always fascinating. this is much more specifically a video featuring a visual neglect patient, so you can get a really good sense of what visual neglect is like. generally speaking, here's a reading on parietal lobes and stroke and some of the various issues that arise when people have strokes. a stroke, usually a blood vessel will explode or swell, and brain tissue will be damaged. so you can learn little bit about damage that way. this one, i think you'll find really fascinating. it's, it's one of these things that, when i heard about it for the first time, i just kind of went, wow. it turns out that the brain doesn't just you know, accept sensory input in a very static way. it desires sensory input. it's hungry for sensory input. so they devised these chambers in the 1960s where you could go in and they would block off all forms of sensory input. you'd have these things around you. you'd be floating in this highly salinated water, and after you're there for a while, you don't feel any sensory input. and it turns out, that's fine for a while. you know, people could maybe sleep for a while, or whatever. but before too long, if they didn't get sensory input, their brain started to create illusory sensory input. that is, the people began to hallucinate sights, sounds, feelings. and people generally cannot stay in these chambers very long because they start to go a little crazy. our brain is hungry for input. and if we don't feed it, it makes its own which is really kind of cool, weird. there was a movie called altered states. it's a fanciful movie. i, i'm not suggesting it's scientifically correct at all. it's not, but if the sensory deprivation thing is, is fascinating for you, check out that altered states movie. but in the meantime, read that, and, and that'll get you going. okay? good. that's the parietal lobe. from here we go to what's perhaps the most important lobe in the brain, at least the one that makes us most human, i would say, the frontal lobe. i will see you there. follow me. [blank_audio].
alright, now that you guys are all amateur and neuroscientists i wanted to kind of cap off this week of the brain by telling you about one of at least the studies that i found most fascinating when i first learned about the brain. so, i'm trying to position my head perfectly right here to illustrate that what we're going to be talking about is something called split-brain syndrome. a situation where the corpus callosum, the area right between the two hemispheres is severed, is cut down the middle creating both a left brain and a right brain, that should be on the, left brain and a right brain. within the same skull. and some of the really fascinating results you saw from those, experiments and what they tell us about perhaps the biggest question we have as psychologists, human consciousness. here we go. alright, so week two lecture eight, the last lecture of week two. and yeah, it's all about the brain but it, what i really want to do is bring together a lot of the things that we've been talking about. so i have emphasized a few times this structure between the two hemispheres. it's not the only place the two hemispheres join. but it is certainly the, the, the super highway of information, the, the part of the two brains. that the two hemispheres that connects the two and allows information to flow freely between them. now, why would anybody have their corpus callosum cut? well in virtually every case, the patients who did this had suffered from extreme forms of epilepsy. now in case you don't know much about epilepsy, comes in different forms. some are called petit mal seizure. people have seizures. but in the petit mal case, they the seizures are. you might not even detect them. so, i could have one right now and i could just stare into space for a second and then come back and, and that can be a petit mal seizure. a little bit of electrical activity in the brain that kind of freezes me for a moment but literally just for a moment. but the more dramatic form is, is something called a grand mal seizure. which if you translate, is big bad so the big bad seizures. and what happens in the big bad seizure is that electrical activity starts in one side of the brain and then goes over to the other but then gets arced back to the starting place and eventually forms a feedback loop. so it goes back and forth and back and forth and back and forth, getting stronger and stronger as it does so. and eventually it literally short circuits the brain. electrical activity starts going all through the brain. the person normally passes out, but the electrical activity continues and it stimulates the motor cortex randomly. and so that leads to convulsions because the motor cortex is being stimulated and so random muscles are moving. so you see a person on the floor usually because they're unconscious. but they're body's moving and convulsing, as we call it as a result of these seizures. so you know, really horrible thing to have happen to you. most people state it's very embarrassing to suffer a grand mal seizure in a public place but for most people who have epilepsy, those sorts of grand mal seizures are relatively infrequent, however for some people, they're extremely frequent. some people in fact have had as many as five to ten of these a day and if you're one of those people. you reach a point where you don't even want to go outside. you don't want to be around other people. you don't want to be in public because you have this constant fear of having a seizure and being embarrassed. and, you know, having to explain to other people and, quite potentially, causing harm to yourself. if you have a seizure on a hard concrete floor in the middle of a highway. you know if you are walking across the screen you suddenly have a seizure it's a very dangerous thing. so for these kind of students not students, excuse me patients at one point doctor's started thinking well, if this is cause by feedback loop across the hemispheres of the brain. if we cut that super highway and did not allow the hemispheres to speak to one another then we should prevent the seizures that should eliminate the seizures. i know it sound pretty dramatic. this is another one of those one way changes to the brain. you cannot undo this. but, some patients felt their life was so horrible the way it was that they were willing to have their corpus callosum severed. so they went in, they had this procedure and, you know, essentially as you see here this whole structure was cut, leaving them with two hemispheres that could no longer communicate well with one another. so what happened? i mean to some extent you know, surely this, this was meant to help with their symptoms. but the doctors that were doing this in the first place and, and these are very famous people now, richard sperry and michael gazzaniga. they were very interested in how this would change the person's being, how it would change their life. and initially, the answer was very surprising. it didn't seem to change them very much at all. they woke up from the seizure and from all accounts seemed to be the same person that had, that they had seen the day before the seizure for example. however, over time they noticed some strange things happening. sometimes the somebody would be asking the patients questions. and they would notice that the left hand of the patient would get agitated while the rest of the patient didn't seem agitated. or sometimes the left hand would start doing things. in one sort of relatively famous case, the left hand started grabbing nurses. or hitting nurses or throwing objects across the room. and when anybody asks the patients, why are you doing that, they would say things like i don't know. i didn't meant to do that. i, i have no idea. so there was this really kind of curious behavior going on. an so eventually, sperry and gazzaniga designed a study. i'm sorry, this, this was just to show you the severed corsa, corpus callosum. an we went through, why you'd cut it. so here's the study that they, designed. they would have a bunch of objects in front of one of these patients who had their corpus callosum cut. and they would now show words, but they, they would cleverly and this doesn't really do full justice to how they had to do this, but it, but it's good enough. they would find a way to show the words in such a way so that only one or the other hemisphere would see them. so it all had to do with lenses on the eye, each eye is actually divided into a left and right whatever falls on the right side of one eye goes to the left hemisphere. sorry, the right side of both eyes goes to the right hemisphere, whatever falls to the left side of both eyes goes to the left hemisphere. so they had these special contact lenses, and they could present words so that, that word would ultimately, so, for example, key, would ultimately only be, registered in the left hemisphere. whereas ring would only be registered, i'm sorry, i'm getting this wrong. key would only be in the right hemisphere. ring would only be in the left. so you can, you know, just kind of trust me on this. you can, you can set up the apparatus so it would work that way. so now, what we have is hemispheres that don't speak to each other. and when we present this, this hemisphere is seeing the word key and this hemisphere is seeing the word ring. now if we ask the patient, what word did you see, they will say the word ring. okay? let's think about that. why ring? well, ring is the word that went into the left hemisphere and of course we know that speech is primarily in the left hemisphere. this is what broke[inaudible] areas for example in the left hemisphere. so the speech hemisphere was seeing the word ring, and that's what it said out loud, i see a ring. now, early on they just did these kinds of studies, and what they noticed is that the left hand again would be very agitated, almost like the left hand's like, almost like it's trying to say no. that's wrong, that's not the word. and, of course, the left hemisphere is seeing the word, sorry the right hemisphere is seeing the word key over here. and the right hemisphere controls the left hand. that's that contralateral wiring i told you about. so eventually they would lay, they decided to lay objects out and what they found is if they again asked the question, what did you see? the left, the right hemisphere which controls the left hand, this left hand would reach out and choose the object that the right hemisphere saw. so the person would verbally say, i saw the word ring, but they would reach out with their left hand for the key. and left hand saying, no i saw the word key. really fascinating. it's suggested to them, that there is almost, essentially two consciousnesses now, inside this one skull. by splitting the brain in half, it seems as though the mind has been split. and that there are now two entities within the same brain, extremely fascinating, and it got even kind of more fascinating as they tried to mine this more. at some point they came up with the, with the following study. i hope nobody's offended by a picture of a relatively attractive woman with relatively few clothes on, cause here we go. they would present something like this to the patient very quickly. present this image but they would present it so that only the right hemisphere would see the image not the speech not the left hemisphere. and so what would typically happen is the patient would blush, okay? it's kind of uncomfortable to see an image like this while you're sitting in a, in a testing room with a bunch of you know, people in lab coats around you. and so the person would blush, but here's the interesting thing. when the, when the doctors said why are you blushing, the person wouldn't just say i don't know. they would say, and that's, let's be clear about this, when they're speaking, it's the left hemisphere speaking and the left hemisphere did not see the picture. but they would say things like the following, oh, i just thought of a bit of an off-color joke, i just remembered this off-color joke. and it kind of embarrassed me to remember it in this situation. and they would say, well, tell us, what was this joke? and the person would typically say something like, oh i can't, i can't remember right now and i, i, i don't want to tell it anyway but that's, but that's why i blushed. okay, now why is this interesting? it's interesting because the person showed like what you'd expect the left hemisphere to say is i did not see anything. but instead it looked like the left hemisphere, the one with speech, convinced itself of a new reality that explained it's behavior. it's like the left hemisphere noticed the blushing, felt the blushing, could, could from previous associations, could identify in a vague sense, where that blushing came from. that blushing came from some sexually inappropriate thought occurring in this context. so it's like the left hemisphere could get there and then it built a story around that. it, it created this story that was consistent with its behavior. and this started a whole notion that, that's still alive and well in psychology and debated pretty rigorously about the role of consciousness. there are some figures in psychology who believe that this is really what consciousness does. that our behavior in the real world, is in fact influenced primarily by stimuli around us. and so the stimuli just invokes certain behaviors in us. and then we essentially watch ourselves, and tell ourselves stories that explain why we behave that way. so the consciousness is in a sense interpreting our behavior, coming up with a theory and then we own it. once we come up with a theory we believe that theory to be true. and this kind of notion of consciousness coming after the fact you know really flies in the face of the notion of us consciously deciding to do things. so it's really fascinating and these split brain studies really fueled that whole notion. i mean it's really, to really get a sense of the split brain phenomenon, you really need to see somebody. so i've got a video here of joe the split brain patient where you can actually see a, a split brain patient behaving in some of the ways i've told you about. so really check that out because that, that will make it i think it will make the magic? is it magic? i don't know if magic is the right word. but the, but the oddness of it really stand out. this is a video of michael gazzaniga himself, so you can get a sense of the personality and he will talk about the split brain studies a little bit. so, hear a little bit from somebody who was right there. and now we have a couple of readings. so one is a nature article all about split brain study, a tale of two halves and another one is an article on psychology today. so written in different levels, but again, all about the same phenomenon and the impact it has had on our understanding of the brain. the connections between the hemispheres and how this all relates to human consciousness. very cool stuff, and i think it'd really make you have a, have a deep and intense appreciation of those three pounds of tissue in our, in our skull. all right, cool. so that wraps up week two. we're going to have a, a little bit of a activity after this week, so, so check out for that for the announcements. and then we're going to continue on our way through a bunch of fascinating psychology experiments, and i, i look forward to doing that with you. have a great time. i'll see you next week. bye bye. [blank_audio]
so far in this course, we've discussed universals what people have in common. so, we've talked about capacities like language, memory, learning, and their emotions. but, people differ from one another, and actually in our everyday lives it's the differences that matter. if i want to describe a friend of mine i wouldn't say, "oh, she has a short-term memory and long-term memory." if i wanted to introduce you to somebody i wouldn't say, "oh, he has emotions that have evolved through natural selection." we're really interested in our everyday life in how people differ is the differences that matter. so, there's a couple of questions we can ask as psychologist, one of which is the nature of the differences, how are different? and then the second is the explanation for the differences, why we're different? there are all sorts of differences as psychologists might look at. some of us see ourselves as male, others as female, others in ways that don't cleanly map onto either of the two. some people are attracted sexually, romantically to males, some to females, some to both, some to neither. within these categories there's a lot of subcategories, sometimes you're sexually or romantically attracted to one type of person or another. it's really interesting to ask why is this so? what shapes your preferences? what's the nature of these preferences.? some of you are happy, others are less happy. obviously, it varies according to your circumstance, but also people are in general either they vary in the extent to which you're happy or unhappy, and this is so interesting that the very last lecture, we'll discuss this. some people have good relationships, and good jobs, and good dealings with their community, and others don't. some people become alcoholics and drug addicts, others don't. when this gets extreme, we call it psychopathology mental illness. but moving outside the range of mental illness, there's just a lot of variation in people. now, we'll focus today on two dimensions that are actually related to life success, personality and intelligence. we'll first talk about what these differences are, how people differ, and then we'll turn to the question of why.
so, let's start with personality. personality is defined as a person's style of dealing with the world and particularly, their style with dealing with other people. intuitively, we have a sense of what it is to be a certain personality. you acknowledge that you are a certain type of person, maybe you're shy, or funny, or extroverted, or conscientious, moody, or some way of characterizing it. you could characterize the people you know this way. you can characterize fictional people like homer simpson or a famous people you don't know like kanye west. based on your experience of their actions, you can make inferences about their personality. but the question is how can we scientifically zoom in and characterize personality? through the history of psychology, there have been attempts to have different tests, different measures of personality. one way to assess the test is on two criteria, reliability and validity. reliability involves measurement error. so, reliability is if you test the same person over time, you should get the same result. that's what a reliable test is. if somebody goes in your bathroom scale under 160 pounds and they step off and they step back on and it's 160 pounds again, it's a reliable scale at least based on that test. if they step off and then step on and is 20 pounds lighter, 20 pounds heavier, the scale isn't reliable. a second way to make sense of tests is validity. how well it measures what it's supposed to measure? so, for instance, you can determine if you're in test neurology your personality by the date of your birth. this is a highly reliable measure. you're tested over and over again and you'll always get the same results. but it's not a valid measure because it doesn't work. it doesn't actually measure your personality. if you have access to the internet, which i assume you do, it's easy to take a lot of personality tests. recently, i took the personality tests online, "which superhero are you", and it said that i am batman. i am dark, love gadgets, and have vowed to help the innocent not suffer the pain you have endured. now, this isn't bad, but the test is neither reliable nor valid. it's not reliable because when i first took it, i came out as the hulk, then i took it again, i came in as a wonder woman. i kept answering the questions in different ways so i got the answer i wanted. basically, i wanted to be batman. it's not valid either because there's no reasonably that it actually taps any deep sense of our nature. we can try to do better. one classic personality test over time is the rorschach inkblot. this is a test that's been used for psychiatric cases, for criminal cases, part of clinical psychology training. the idea is that if you properly interpret people's responses to inkblot, what do they see? you should look at this and figure out what you see. well, it turns out most psychologists believe it has no validity at all. it does not tell you anything about the deep aspects of your psychology. so, it could be used as a game but nothing more. so, what's a more scientific approach? a while ago, the psychologist, gordon allport, took 18,000 traits from a dictionary that he viewed as bearing on personality. now, that's a lot, but it turns out they aren't independent. many, many words are just different ways of saying the same thing. so, whether somebody is a friendly or sociable or welcoming or a warm-hearted, basically, you're capturing the same trait. so, psychologists then try to zoom it down. the psychologists icing broke it down into two main traits. at first, whether you're introverted or extroverted, and whether you're neurotic or stable. then, there's a third trait whether psychotisism versus non psychotisism. basically, are you aggressive or you're compassionate? cattell, as you see here, broke it down to 16 different factors. factors like sociable versus non-sociable, bold versus timid, tense versus relaxed, and so on. now, a lot of modern commentators have come to the consensus that 16 is too many, and two to three are too few. they've zoomed in on the big five. these are neuroticism, stability. basically, are you a worrying, anxious, self-pitying, vulnerable person or more calm? extroversion versus introversion, which you know what it means. openness to experience versus non-open to new experiences. agreeable versus antagonistic, and conscientious versus undirectednes. basically, the idea is that the questions you would ask of a new person, somebody you're interesting in to know, will all fall under at least one of these five categories. are they nice or are they nasty? are they reliable or are they a flake? are they nuts or are they stable? are they bold or are they cautious? are they a leader or follower? notice that the first two items on the scale are from icing. fortunately, for students interested in taking tests, if you switch around the order of these, you get the acronym ocean. ocean is therefore a nice thing to remember as the big five of personality. it turns out that these really work. so, they're pretty stable over many years. if you test somebody at age 40 and test them again age 50, you will find that they're the same. people agree on them. so, the way you characterize yourself on a scale or roughly fit the way other people characterize you. your score on a personality test will predict real-world behavior. people who are conscientious on the test tend to have more marital fidelity. people with openness to new experiences changed their jobs more. extroverts look people in the eye more and have more sexual partners. so, to a first approximation, we've answered part of the question of how people differ by focusing on personality, and say there are five separate dials, each they could be turned to a different setting. your pattern on those dials is your personality.
so let's turn now to a second way in which people differ that's been the focus of a lot of work by psychologists, and this is intelligence. now it's hard to get explicit about what we mean when we talk about intelligence. there was a poll of 1,000 experts were i asked them what intelligence meant to them. and just about all of them mentioned abstract, reasoning, problem solving, and ability to acquire knowledge. and then other things kept coming up memory, mental speed, good with language, good with math, knowledge, creativity and so on. and intuitively, we have intuitions that some people are not very smart and some people are very smart, and intelligence is how we capture it. now, there's been enormous energy on developing tests for intelligence. and the classic tests developed by spearman, involved breaking down intelligence into two parts. and there's a distinction between what you can call g and what you would call s. so imagine that there's a series of separate tests, separate components of an intelligence test. imagine there's six of them, and so you'll do them and you'll get six separate scores. but spearman points out that you could break this up, you could talk about people's skill at each individual test. and that's teir s, but you could also do the math and realize that there's a common factor, spanning all of these tasks, and you can call that g. and so here's an analogy, imagine if instead of a mental task, it was a physical task, it was an athletic task. so you have to do all sorts of things like running, and gymnastics, and boxing, and so on, weightlifting, and you get your different score on say, six different athletic tests. so you'll get a lot of variance. some people will be really good at one, and some people will be bad at another, and there'll definitely be differences. but the interesting part is they'll also have sort of a common factor. somebody who is in really good shape and is a trained athlete will probably do pretty well in all of them. somebody who is obese or extremely elderly or just out of shape will do badly in all of them. so you could sort of talk about being good at weightlifting and good at running, but you could also have a general factor, like good at athletics. and similarly, for psychology tests, we can talk about being good at math and good at verbal. but also just good at intelligence, in general. now when you look at how tests are coded, it's actually interesting. we'll get to this later when we talk a bit about differences. but the average of tests are always calibrated to be a 100. so once they're scored, the numbers are fiddled with, so the average is always a 100. and they have what statisticians call a normal distribution. about two-thirds of the people have an intelligence between 85 and a 115. and when it come to something of an inteligence of 145, only a fraction, 0.13% have that. so you get a number with these tests, you get a g and the question is, what does this mean? what does this g mean? and it used to be said, that it doesn't tell you anything. your score on an iq test just tells you how good you are at doing iq tests, but this isn't really true. your score on iq tests has a pretty powerful predict of power on school achievements, the sort of jobs you get, how well do you do at life actually. iq tests have a degree of validity. they seem to test the sort of thing you want to test. now to some extent though, the success of iq test is a self-fulfilling prophecy. because if as a society, you take them as important, they then become important. if you need a high iq to get into a good college, and you do because the sort of tests like the sats and gres that we do for education are basically iq tests. then it turns out that having an iq will be connected to being in a good college and, to the extent that being in a good college is relevant to your future income. [sound] iq gets related to income. to use an analogy, suppose people were tested on the color of your hair and if you have red hair, you immediately get into harvard, and yale, and stanford. well, it'll turn out that having red hair is going to be strongly related to success in life. not because of some intrinsic power of red hair, but because of the social value given to this. and if that sounds like a fanciful example, think about skin color. where skin color is powerfully related to how well you do in life. at least in part, because people take skin color very seriously when making decisions, both consciously and unconsciously. it seems not very debatable that iq captures something of meaningful relevance. so there's actually research that finds that it correlates, your score on a test correlates with your mental speed and the span of your working memory. short term memory that we discussed before. people with high iqs as measure by iq tests are able to think in some way faster and better. and it does make a difference in everyday life.
so we reviewed the couple of ways in which people are different. we're different in our personality and we're different in our intelligence. but now let's turn to the question of what makes people different, why are we different? and very generally, there's two different possibilities, there is genes and environment, or sometimes known as heredity and environment, and often knowns as nature and nurture. the way we define these considerations, they're exhaustive, there is nothing else. so first look at genes, and in particular look heredity. so psychologists behavior or geneticists talk about the proportion of a trait that's heritable. and it's important to know what that means. it doesn't mean how much of the trait is due to your genes. i mean, asking how much of your height or intelligence is due to your genes is actually a very confusing question. rather, when we talk about heredity, we're talking about differences. and in particular, we're talking proportion of variance that's due to genetic differences. and the way people think about differences in this field is you go from zero to one. and zero to one means 0% and one is a 100%. so a way to think about it is, height is fairly heritable because the different heights that people have is due to a large extent in their genes. but think about the number of legs people have. the number of legs people have, most people have two legs, but some have one, and some have zero. is the number of legs that people have heritable? well, no, it's actually not highly heritable. for the most part, the reason why you have only one leg or no legs is due to some accident, some sort of experience. so that's genes. and then what remains is environment. and we could parcel environment up into two parts. there's shared environment, this is the proportion of the variance in people that's due to environment that different family members share. so people living in the same household might share, your siblings might share. and then there's non-shared environment, which is everything else. so if you're different from your brother because you got hit by a snowball, or you got the flu one day, or somebody bullied you, or you won the lottery, that's non-shared environment. and together, this is it, everything is either heredity, shared environment, or non-shared environment. and now we can ask the question of how to resolve the puzzle of the extent to which these different factors explain variation. in the real world, it's kind of hard to pull them apart. so i'm a lot like my sister. and we could say, why? well, in part, well, we share a lot of the same genes because we have the same biological parents, but we were also raised the same way in the same family. and so to pull them apart, you look at some interesting cases. so for instance, you could look at monozygotic twins. monozygotic twins are essentially clones, they share all the same genes. and one could compare them to dizygotic twins. dizygotic twins, although they're born at the same time, are just siblings, they're regular old siblings. they have a 50% overlap in genes. and you could compare these to adopted siblings, which have no special genetic overlap. if my wife and i adopt a kid into our family, that kid's relationship to my sons, they'll have to share an environment, we'll raise them the same way, for the most part. but he won't share the same genes. and finally, two people raised in the same house, by the same parents, by definition have a 100% the same shared environment. so that's all background, but now this gives you a way of asking some questions. so you might ask, for instance, are monozygotic twins identical twins, much more similar to one another than dizygotic twins? and if so, this might suggest there's a high role of genes, high heritability. on the other hand, a critic could say, well, maybe monozygotic twins will be treated more similarly than dizygotic twins, both within the family and outside the family, because they look so much alike. so we have to bear that qualification in mind. you might ask, what if monozygotic twins turn out to be just the same as dizygotic twins? well, that shows the genes don't matter that much. what about adopted children? well, similarly, if they turn out to be highly similar to their brothers and sisters, that suggests there's a high role of shared environment. suppose all of the children in the bloom family have an iq of 105. and we adopt children, and they grow up and they have an iq of 105 too. that would suggest that the bloom's family environment is shaping their iqs. on the other hand, if they entered a family and they end up with widely different iqs depending on where they're from, depending on their genes, this would suggest that iq is shaped more by the genes than by the environment. the most exotic case, and of course, this is is very rare, is twins raised apart. if twins raised apart, identical twins are raised apart, then they would be, and they're entirely dissimilar, dissimilar as any other people, any two strangers. this suggests that with regard to what you're looking at, there's no effect of genes. on the other hand, if they're highly similar, there's a high effect of genes. and in fact, to get to the next lecture, which is about what we know about these differences, it actually turns out very surprising that identical twins raised apart turn out to be surprisingly alike. they have similar attitudes to the death penalty, religion, to music, similar behaviors with regard to crime, gambling, and divorce. in one study, they took two identical twins raised apart and then scanned their brains. and they were so similar that you couldn't tell them apart. but now what we'll do, more generally, in the next lecture, is talk about what we know, about where these differences come from, using the tools we've just discussed.
so, what have we learned from the methods of behavioral genetics? there are two big findings, and they're both kind of surprising. the first is, that there is high heritability for just about everything. just about every psychological trait in which people differ, a large proportion of the difference is due to the genes. this is true for intelligence, it's true for personality, it's true for religiosity, is true for happiness, something we'll discuss in the final lecture. the way in which you're different from the person next to, you from your siblings, from your friend is to a large extent determined by your genes. now, there's a critical qualification that's important to raise here, which is that, this conclusion about the importance of heredity; the importance of genes, applies within human groups. we know that there are differences between human groups, different ethnicities, different cultures, different countries, vary in intelligence. but it's fully consistent with the high importance of heredity for differences within groups, that the differences between groups may be due to environmental forces. to see this, consider an example by the geneticists, richard lewontin. imagine two plots of land, each which have genetically diverse seeds, and you fertilize one and you don't fertilize the other. well, planting the ones you don't fertilize are going to not grow as well. this has been an entire, and so they'll be a big difference between the plots that has entirely in environmental cause your choice of which plot to fertilize. this could be true even if within each plot the variation in the size of the plants is determined entirely by the genes, you can have a 100 percent heredity within each group but the differences between the groups have an entirely environmental cause. lewontin makes his analogy on purpose because he's speaking to differences we find in human groups, you often find cases where human groups differ in all sorts of ways, but it turns out that they've had different environments. imagine one group gets worse access to healthcare, education, to social opportunities, and so on, this group might fare poorly relative to a group that has a much better access to all of these things. this can be true even if the differences within each of the groups is due to environmental factors. furthermore, we know that environmental factors can have a huge influence on intelligence, and here's how we know it, we know it through what's been called the flynn effect. it goes like this, whenever we do iq tests we always standardize them to 100, so if you want to know what the average iq was in 1960 was 100, and if you want to know what the average iq will be in 2050 it will be 100. but what flynn did was, he asked the question, what would happen if you didn't standardized tests? his results were astonishing. basically, if you look at people say from 1950 to people in 1980, or compare from the 1930s to 1990s, it turns out our intelligence has been rising. that is, if you take somebody from roughly 1985 and tested them using the same test as you did in the 50s, they would have an average iq of about 120. put simply, our iqs have been going up rapidly over the last 70 or so years, maybe 70 to 100 years. nobody exactly knows why, but this is proof positive that groups iqs can change, can move around due to factors that have nothing to do with genes, because clearly there wasn't a genetic difference over this time. so, the first finding is the strong heritability, though, within group not between group. the second finding is almost as surprising. the second finding is that, all of the remaining variance, almost all the remaining variance, is due to non-shared environment. so remember, everything adds up to heredity, plus shared environment, plus non-shared environment and it turns out that not that shared environment, sort of environments you get from your parents, from within a family, statistically count for little or nothing. so, when it comes to personality or intelligence, an adopted child is no more similar to his siblings than to a stranger. to put it clear for example, iq correlates with genetically unrelated adults who were raised in the same family is about zero. if i have a family and i'm high intelligence, introvert, with highly conscientious, whatever, my children are likely to share some of my traits, but my adopted children are not, suggesting that whatever i do to my kid, whatever effect i have, it's not shaping their basic psychological processes. this is such a surprising and weird conclusion, i'll devote the next part of the lecture to talking about it.
so, one technical way of putting it is that shared environment doesn't matter at least for children in well-off or middle-class families. but there's a more radical way of making this claim and this is that parents don't matter or actually parents do matter but they matter just because they typically contribute to genetic material that makes up a child. parents and parenting practices don't matter. they don't play a reliable role in shaping children's intelligence or their personality. this was the claim made and developed based under behavioral genetics data by the psychologist judith rich harris, in her book "the nurture assumption" subtitled why children turn out the way they do. parents matter less than you think and peers matter more. so, harris acknowledged that roughly half of the variation in various traits is caused by the genes, but since the other half isn't due to shared environment, she looked at peers and peer groups as a reliable source for human differences. this is a controversial interesting claim because there's other aspects of non-shared environment including random events that may cause the difference. but this might seem like a shocking claim. you might be thinking there must be an effect of shared environment. of course parents have an effect, after all there are a million studies as well as common sense showing that there's a high correlation between parent and child for everything. parents who read a lot have children who read a lot. religious parents have religious children, criminals have criminal children, rich parents have rich children, smart parents have smart children and so on and so forth. these are obvious much replicated findings. but the problem is, they're consistent with multiple explanations. so, it's possible that all of the shared environment data is wrong and that good kids have good parents because parents do something that affects their kids. but it's also possible that we know this to be true that parents share their genes with the kids. since children are typically raised by people who share their genes, it's impossible to point to dissimilarity between parent and child and says to the environment. it could be that the environment plays no role at all. finally, there's something called child effects which is that the child could be making the parent's good not vice versa or making the parents bad. so, for instance, children who are spanked tend to be more violent. now, one possibility is there are genes that make parents likely to spank and children likely to be violent or genes that proposed people say to low impulse control lean both to the spanking of bad behavior. a second possibility maybe the one that most people believe is that parents spanking their kid makes her kid meaner. but a third possibility is if you have an aggressive and violent kid, you're more likely to spank him or her and that will be a child effect. parents might read a lot more to intelligent and inquisitive kids and this could be because they share genes, it could be because the reading makes children more intelligent inquisitive or it could mean that if you have an intelligent inquisitive child, you're just more likely to reach to that child as an effect of the child, not to genes and not the not the parental behavior. so, when you see similarities and when you see effects, you have to think about the different alternative explanations for this. i'll give you an example of this. one i think is probably the worst study in the world. i won't single out the investigators, i'll just give the headline as reported in popular press. showing that family meals help teens avoid smoking, alcohol, drugs or as one summary put it, the most important thing you can do with your kids, eat dinner with them. so, here's the exercise, you have the finding which is that kids who have a family meal with their parents are less prone to take drugs. how could you explain it? the way the article explains it is that a family meal makes kids less prone to take drugs. but, we could sit here we can easily think of multiple alternative explanations. one possibility for instance is it's the other way around which is that if your kids don't take drugs and they're just good kids and they hang around a house wall or friends, take drugs and have a good time, they're more likely to be around for family meals or it could be a third factor which is there are good families and bad families. good families tend on average to raise kids who don't take many drugs and also have family meals while bad families have kids who were stoned all the time and don't have family meal. even if there's no relationship at all between the drugs and the family meal. this is in the same sense that cities that have large populations have many churches and many bowling alleys and cities with small populations have few churches and few bowling alleys. it's not that there's a connection between churches and bowling alleys, rather they're both the byproducts of a single effect which is the population of the city. finally, in this particular study, they didn't factor out age. so, what the study might actually be finding is that 12-year-olds are more likely to be drug free and have meals with their family while older kids, 17-year-old are more likely to take drugs and have no family meal. the effect could be driven by the age difference and have nothing to do with any sort of relationship between drugs and family meals. but you might still be unhappy with this. particularly if you're of a certain age you might be certain that your mom and dad had a huge role in your life. you might think that's why you're so happy and successful or you might think that's why you're so miserable and screwed up. but i would ask, how do you know? how do you partial out genes versus environment? are you adopted? if you're not adopted then you have no way of doing irrelevant parceling. you have no way of knowing whether dissimilarity or defects of your parents is due to genetic overlap are due to environment. even if you are adopted, it's difficult to figure out what's cause and what's effect. suppose your parents treated you poorly and you were depressed and anxious and troublesome child, was it that they treated you poorly and they made you so or did they treat you poorly as a response to the way you were. now, sometimes people freak out at this point and they might say "look, if parents don't mold their children's personalities which is what the behavioral genetics data suggests, why should they ever treat their children nicely?" i find this a very very weird claim but people make it so i have to address it. one way to realize that it's weird is most people believe that we don't mold our spouses and lovers and romantic partners' personalities. does that mean we shouldn't treat them nicely? well, of course it doesn't mean that. parents treat their children nicely and they should treat their children nicely for the same reason you should treat the people you love nicely because you love them, because you want them to be happy, because you want to have good relationships with them. being a good parent or a good friend or a good spouse or lover is not at all contingent on believing that your actions will transform their personality and intelligence. i think there's a lot more research to be done in this area and we might discover that the conclusions and i'm confidently raising right now turn out to be false and that there's more going on. but at this point, we have to live with one of surprising conclusions have come from behavioral genetics and from psychology more generally. which is that parenting doesn't matter anywhere near as much as people believe it does.
in this lecture, we're going to finally turn to the study of clinical psychology, which is the study of mental illnesses and how to treat them, often known as psychopathology. for many of you, this is what psychology is all about. when i meet a stranger on a plane, for instance, and they ask me what i do and i say i'm a psychologist, they might think of me as somebody who treats people and they ask, "what sort of problems do you deal with?" while we now know there's so much more to psychology than this, it's certainly true that clinical psychology is a central aspect of our field. its central for obvious reasons because the mental illnesses are extremely important and extremely relevant. both from a theoretical perspective, if you're interested in how the mind works, but of course more practical perspective because of the seriousness of these problems. some very large proportion of people, by some estimates about a half, will have some sort of mental problem throughout your development. if you're not directly affected by mental illness, there's people you love who have. so, to set the stage. let's think about what we're talking about, when we're talking about mental disorders because we could be talking a lot of things. so, right psychologists use the diagnostic and standard manual file. this is the most recent, there might be, if sometime has gone by since i did this lecture, they might have something more advanced. what you find in these pages is a lot of things, this includes some crazy people muttering on the streets as in schizophrenia. it might include personal down syndrome or autism. an elderly person with dementia. somebody with a depression so bad that they can't get out of bed. somebody for social phobia who's profoundly awkward around people. someone who's a paranoid schizophrenics, maybe who meets the sort of ultimate stereotype of the mentally ill who might believe that his or her thoughts are being monitored by the cia. all sorts of things. you know what you're dealing with here. there are reasonably clear cases of what it's like to have a mental illness. but they're also difficult cases. so, for instance, what do you deal with a successful criminal? like bernie madoff, for instance, who swindled people edited their life savings. is evil, where does evil ends and mental illness begins? to take a fictional case which often interest psychologists, is batman mentally ill? he devotes his life to helping others. he's a successful multimillionaire in gotham city, but he gets around on one hour of sleep at night. he dresses like a bat. he's fully knowledgeable that a lot of his behaviors are due to a post-traumatic stress disorder after witnessing the murder of his parents. some of you are attics, is this a mental illness? the dsm categorize as such what some of you might push back. what about sex addiction. what about being a workaholic. what about eating too much. whereas illness end and free will begin? this isn't just a philosophical problem, it's an everyday problem. your insurance companies for instance, pay for illnesses, they reimburse you for your treatments. unanswered the question of what an illness is? is a matter of some social importance and what illness is, for instance, also affects whether the government programs like medicare and medicaid will pay for. it affects everyday life too. suppose i'm teaching a large class and a student says, "i'm sorry about my getting in my paper late, but don't dock my grade, i had a panic attack or i had a schizophrenics break." well, i definitely say, "i feel terrible for you. don't worry about it. i hope you're getting good treatment." on the other hand, if my students said, they didn't do the paper on time because they were out late searching for sexual partners because of their sex addiction, i would have a different response. so, how do we think about mental illness? well, here are some possibilities. one ancient view was it's due to demonic possession, and that's not true. [inaudible] people [inaudible] with schizophrenia being schizophrenics, as being possessed by the devil, i don't need to explain to you the data doesn't support that. another view worth talking about as a sort of cynical view, which is that the labels of mental illness or what we do to people who deviate from us socially. it's worth taking seriously because, for instance, in many countries, including what used to be the soviet union, dissidents, people who protested against the governments were put in insane asylums. as an example that comes closer to home, people with certain sexual desires, including homosexuality used to be counted as mentally ill by the psychological and psychiatric community. it was only in 1973 for instance, that being gay was no longer counted as a mental illness. it supports people like the psychiatrist thomas szasz, who in his book the myth of mental illness said, "mental illness is a myth. we call people sick mentally ill if they deviate from society, and the label of mental illness deprives them of responsibility and dismisses them." there is a recent debate for instance over neuro diversity which takes a similar tag. which argues that different ways of being, for instance being mildly autistic isn't an illness in any interesting sense, but more just a diverse aspects of different way of processing information in dealing with the world, one that deserves respect. on the other hand, it'll be pretty clear that these really are illnesses in a very real sense. they lead up to lack of functioning, clearly. they're often associated with brain damage or brain trauma or unusual neurochemistry. maybe most important with treatment, people become happier, and more competent and better able to deal with the world. so, this supports what's called the medical model of mental illness, where you think in terms of symptoms and an underlying disorder which is ultimately treated. so, i'm going to go through the major classes of mental illness and major mental illnesses and i'll just talk very briefly about each one, and then i'll move to the more optimistic question of treatment, how do we fix people with these disorders?
i want to begin by talking about schizophrenia in part because it's the most important and most terrible of all mental illnesses. by some estimates, about one percent of the world's population suffer from schizophrenia, but about half the beds in mental hospitals are occupied by schizophrenics. it is a terrible devastating illness. the people with schizophrenia have been described as the lepers of the 20th century, this was written a little while ago. they're rejected and shunned by society. to get an understanding of it, the first thing you have to realize is, it's not split personalities, it's not multiple personalities, that's another disorder, a type of dissociative disorder, we'll talk about it later. people think it means that because of the root of the word. it comes from the greek words meaning "split" and "mind". but the split refers to a loss of touch with reality. before getting into the details of schizophrenia, here's a wonderful depiction from the movie, the soloist in which jamie foxx plays a schizophrenic. stevie wonder fan? oh, [inaudible] life. signed, sealed, delivered. but you really shouldn't rattle the violin like that, because you have treat the violin like a child, you have to protect it. you only got two strings. all i want do is play music, and here's the problem that i'm having right here. this was gone, this was gone, this little one's out of commission. but you get that in cleveland public schools, a lot of military statues in cleveland. is that where you're from? very military war in the city, you're not going to get musicians or parade there. you got severance hall there, you have the music settlement, ohio state university, whereas in los angeles you have los angeles pd, you have la times, you have los angeles lakers. those are armies too, military regimentation, experimentation [inaudible] roman catholicism, colonel sanders. but this guy right here is recorded into the orchestra. now, the cello can back this guy with the same music but the cello can't be concert master at all. he leads out this is just roman, [inaudible]. you can't play music in the winter in cleveland because of the ice and the snow that's why i prefer los angeles, the beethoven city because it never rains in southern california and if it does, all i have to do is just go in the tunnel i can play to my heart's content. i'm flabbergasted about the statue, aren't you flabbergasted about this? anyway, nice to meet you. you have any idea how it got here? no. maybe they dropped it off late at night because it's just astonishing to sit here for hours and just gaze at it. it just blows me away. no idea. it really blows me away. that someone as greatest beethoven is the leader of los angeles. yeah. i'm steve lopez, la times. lopez, l-o-p-e-z? yeah. lopez. los angeles times, mr lopez. what's your name? nathaniel anthony ayres junior, n-a-t-h-a-n-i-e-l a-n-t-h-o-n-y a-y-r-e-s j-u-n-i-o-r, or jr period. i apologize for my appearance, i've had a few setbacks. me too. who are nancy, paul, and craig? those were my classmates at juilliard. so, here are the symptoms of schizophrenia, and to be diagnosed as having schizophrenia among other things, you have to have at least two of these. so, there are positive symptoms, and positive means things that you do, things that happen to you and ways in which you're different. these include hallucinations, where you experience things which don't really happen. typically they're auditory, they're sounds. so, you might hear voices. you might hear voices from god, or from the devil, from relatives, or from sinister people asking you to do terrible things. a second symptom is a delusion, and a delusion is different from hallucination. hallucination is a sensory experience that didn't really happen. a delusion is an irrational belief. so, you might believe, for instance, that you're jesus christ. if you're christian, one way schizophrenia might manifest itself in believing that you're christ. often, the delusions are what they call delusions of reference, where you have certain structured believes that circle around you. maybe the government is tracking you, or aliens are trying to recruit you, there's something going wrong in the world and it might manifest itself in some sort of paranoid feelings or disturbed feelings that are based on you getting a lot of attention, a lot of focus. perhaps, for instance, you might believe that people are reading your mind. there is disorganized speech or word salad, often schizophrenics sort of gabble, and disorganized behavior, which is a polite word for odd behavior for doing weird things. there's also negative symptoms which involve an absence of cognition or affect, where people become emotionless or their emotions are dulled. they don't talk, they don't move. in the most extreme case of catatonic schizophrenia, they may just be perfectly still and not even move at all. there are different subtypes and these are not all of them, but this will give you a flavor of this, which is that there's paranoid schizophrenia. paranoid schizophrenia may well be what people think about when we think about schizophrenics, which is, you might believe you had delusions of persecution and some delusion of grandeur that others are jealous of you, they're inferior, you have super and special powers. as i mentioned before, there's catatonic schizophrenia, you're just kind of frozen. there's disorganized schizophrenia. just a general breakdown of regular thought without much of a focus, you have delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, and behavior and a flat affect. then there's undifferentiated type, which is kind of where hard to classify aspects of schizophrenia. so, you might wonder what's wrong with schizophrenia? what do all of these things have in common? the basic malfunction may well be an inability to sequence and coordinate your thoughts to get your head together. essentially, this leads to a certain unfortunate effect is you lose contact with others. so, this original split in your mind, your inability to reason, makes it difficult to deal with others and then because you can't deal with others, your disorder gets worse. this is a typical vicious circle one finds in mental illnesses and in fact, a lot of delusions and hallucinations may well be seen as an elaboration of the private world of a person who's lost contact with other people and is also having a difficulty distinguishing fantasy and reality. what causes this sort of neuro malfunction as malfunction thinking? well, there's some evidence. it could be due to too much dopamine, and in fact, studies of schizophrenia find abnormally high dopamine activity. one reason to believe this is that anti-psychotic drugs have some beneficial effect with schizophrenia and they work by blocking dopamine reception at the synapse so dopamine doesn't work as well. it's also supported by the fact that if somebody who's not schizophrenics takes a lot of amphetamines, you sometimes get amphetamine psychosis, which is a lot like schizophrenia. but, this is a crude theory of schizophrenia, nobody believes it in the simple form i'm giving. for one thing, anti-psychotic drugs if it was really caused by an excess of dopamine, anti-psychotic drugs should work for everybody, but they don't. for another, there's structural abnormalities in the brains that can't be accounted for by this dopamine hypothesis. there's been a lot of studies on heritability of schizophrenia, and as you'll see here there's a powerful role of genetics to the extent that a close biological relative has schizophrenia, your increase in likely to have it yourself. in fact, if your identical twin has it, you're about 50 percent likely to have it. but notice, the numbers are not 100 percent. so, if it was entirely genetic, then if your twin had it, you would have it too, and you don't. so, it has to be some sort of environmental triggers so that one person has it and another doesn't. there are different hypotheses about what these triggers could be. it could be, even very early in life a difficult birth or some potential viral infections. it's argued that more schizophrenics are born in the winter than summer. then later in life, it may be due to stress producing circumstances or difficult family environment, and in fact, schizophrenics report more of these than non schizophrenics. but, it's a complicated problem to determine cause and effect here. for instance, it might be that schizophrenics early on are showing schizophrenics symptoms which leads to more difficulties in the families or more stressful environments, it also might mean that people who know they have mental illnesses are more prone to remember bad events. so, as always figuring out cause and effect, figuring out what is the consequence of a disorder, and what is the cause of a disorder, and what's merely related to a disorder are very difficult indeed.
so, mood disorders are the most common type of mental illness and they come in two general forms: depression and bipolar disorder. so, depression is also known as major depressive disorder and this is to distinguish it from sadness, from our everyday usage of the term when saying that, "oh, it's been a bad day, i'm pretty depressed." to have major depressive disorder is a more serious thing, and clinicians define it as a severely depressed mood that last two or more weeks, which means that a couple of days of deep sadness doesn't make you depressed, and is accompanied by feelings of worthlessness and lack of pleasure, lethargy and sleep and appetite disturbances. in order to be counted as having major depressive disorder, it can't have a reasonable cause. so, for instance, if the love of your life dies terribly, you're going to be really miserable for a couple of weeks, but that doesn't count as major depressive disorder. while the minimum amount of time you need to get counted as having major depressive disorder is two weeks. the average episode is about 12 weeks on average, that's how long it typically lasts. as i said, it's common, about 15 percent of people are going to be depressed at some point in their life. it's much more common in women than men and there's different theories as to why. so, one theory is that women in certain ways have harder lives, they make less money, they're more prone to be in poverty and poverty contributes to likelihood of becoming mentally ill. it could be due to hormonal differences and in fact, one type of depression, postpartum depression which is depression after the birth of a child, plainly is due to hormonal changes in a woman's body and brain. it could be because men are less willing than women to report depression and depressive symptoms because part of us sort of ideal notion of what is to be a man might include not going for help for this sort of thing. finally, as a fourth theory, a promising theory is developed by my colleague, susan nolan huxley and my late colleague ariel, who suggests that men and women have different ways of dealing with stressful events. so, a man and a woman who are prone to this sort of mental illness, when they receive a life stressor, the man might deny that anything is going on and try to distract themselves, while women may accept what's going on and in fact, ruminate about it, think about it, mall over their sadness which may well turn everyday sadness into major depressive disorder. depression is heritable. much more so for severe depression and what this means is that if your identical twin has major depressive disorder you're likely to have it if your biological parents have it, it makes you more prone to have it. we know that neurotransmitters are involved in depression and so one theory of depression is that it's due to low levels of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine and serotonin. one mid of support for this is that when you give patients drugs, these drugs often work by increasing the level of norepinephrine and serotonin in your brain and sometimes they work, sometimes they make the depression go away. but just as with schizophrenia, we know it's not as simple as this and here's one reason why it's not a simple, suppose you get the drugs and you take them. it turns out that they have their effects on neurotransmitters right away. but your depression doesn't go away right away, it often takes a couple of weeks even if they're going to work and that's suggests that the neurochemical story is going to be more complicated. from a psychological level, what seems to go on in depression, what seems to be the core problem is some sort of negatively biased thoughts, some sort of negative and counterproductive patterns of thoughts. if a non-depressed person fails an exam, he or she might say, "well, that's too bad. i'll do better next time, wasn't a fair exam." but if a depressed person might fail an exam, they might catastrophizing," this is the end of the world, this is terrible, my life will never be the same". they might view it as telling them something terrible about themselves, "i'm an idiot, i'm a fool." they may believe that things can never change. "i'll never get any smarter, i'll never do any better, this is the way my life will always be". now, you might be tempted to think, well, this is why some people have major depressive episodes and others don't because they have these different patterns of thoughts, but it turns out there's not much evidence that people who become depressed before they were depressed, had a bad pattern of thought. so, this pattern of thought though maybe an integral part of depression, seems to be caused by depression, but it doesn't seem to be why people get depressed in the first place. the most extreme manifestation of depression and most serious manifestation is suicide. people who are not depressed do kill themselves, but people have mood disorders are much more likely to kill themselves about eight times more likely. in fact, about half of people who take their own lives are in the midst of a depressive episode. you'll see here some statistics about suicide. there's a sex difference, which is one way of thinking about it is that women attempt suicide a lot more. but men are more likely to succeed usually because they use more lethal methods. so instead of pills, they might use a gun and the demographics here are telling as well. so, very early on, black men are proportionally more likely to kill themselves. but then for the rest of life, there is an enormous difference where for some reason suicide is extremely likely relative to other people in older white men. suicide is contagious, hard to believed to be contagious. there was von goethe, who wrote a book a long time ago about a young romantic who shot himself over a lost love. then the werther effect, the character was named murder, led to many young men killing themselves in fact, inspired by the book, and we know that there's often it was prominent suicide. in a high school for instance, it may lead to other suicides. its as if it it gives people the idea where they haven't had it, it seems like an existence proof, and people are troubled by this. as i give this lecture, there's a television show called 13 reasons why, which is all about somebody's suicide and different groups are protesting the show arguing that it's going to motivate more people to commit suicide. on the other hand, it's not clear this contagion effect always occurs. so, kurt cobain killed himself and kurt cobain had many young fans. but for whatever reason that kurt cobain suicide didn't lead to other suicides on the part of young people. now, i've talked about major depressive disorder which is pretty common. but the other form of mood disorder, a lot less common, about one percent of the population is bipolar depression. bipolar depression isn't just sadness, but there's actually swings back and forth from mania to depression. a mania is an extremely high mood often with delusions and insane behavior and incredible extraordinary energy. we know bipolar depression is highly heritable, much more heritable than major depression. it seems to have a different brain basis, a different brain chemistry, is treated with different drugs. very controversial leaders in association with creativity, where a lot of very creative people like vincent van gogh or virginia woolf suffer from bipolar depression. one argument is that there are manic episodes, there are manic periods lead to the creation of great work. on the other hand, some people and i'm probably one of them, believe that this is sort of more of a coincidence than anything else and in fact, great artists and writers would be better off if they didn't suffer from bipolar depression and mania, might be a good thing. but it's not clear, you do your best work under a manic state and of course, the depression is a terrible thing and we should keep in mind that virginia woolf killed herself.
so, the next class of disorders that we are going to discuss is the category of anxiety disorders. now, anxiety is sort of this vague feeling of fear and apprehension and everybody experiences this. having some anxiety is just part and parcel of living a life. but it could become a problem when it's irrational, when it makes no sense, when it's uncontrollable, and when it's disruptive. the primary thing that categorizes anxiety disorders is distressing, persistent anxiety obviously enough, but also the possibility of maladaptive behaviors that serve to reduce anxiety. so, the anxiety is one problem but to match people act in certain ways to make the anxiety go away, and these ways themselves cause problems. so, one major type of anxiety disorder is called generalized anxiety disorder, worrying about things all the time. about one in every 20 people get this at some point in their lives and the worry interferes or you're functioning, and at least the physical symptoms like headaches, stomach aches, muscle tension, and irritability. now, we know that just like everything else we've discussed, generalized anxiety disorder has some genetic component. it is related to genetically to major depression that is if you have family members who have major depression, you are more likely to get generalized anxiety disorder. it's sometimes seen also as possibly caused by childhood trauma. so, the logic here, one way to think about it is that something early in life, either genetic predisposition or a trauma, something terrible that happens, makes you super vigilant, you're on the watch for bad things to happen. then, when some bad thing does happen or just some major event, some big life change, this could trigger full-blown generalized anxiety disorder. this model that we see here is similar to what we see for other types of mental illness which is one starts out with a vulnerability, a vulnerability to schizophrenia, vulnerability to depression, and then some event triggers it and then makes a disorder emerge. another type of anxiety disorder, our phobias, which are intense irrational fears and they could focus on objects, they could focus on events or situations and they're often social. social phobias might manifest themselves as sort of a severe form of shyness. they tend to emerge in adolescence during the teenage years and they're more common in women than men. there's sort of a picture to give you a feeling for how common different phobias are so you can see many people are afraid of snakes or being in high places but not many people are afraid of cats, for instance. we've talked about phobias before in the context of behaviorism and learning theories, and there is a classical conditioning model of phobias where you have something which is initially a neutral stimulus like a dog, but then dog bites you and the pain of the bite, that's an unconditioned stimulus, and so you associate the dog with a bite and all of a sudden, you're afraid of dogs. it's not a crazy theory but it has many problems. for one thing, people typically have no memory of a traumatic experience. i'm kind of have a bit of a phobia about mice and rats just between us, but i've never had a bad experience with them. i know people who are terrified of heights but it's not that they ever fell from something. moreover, there are many cases where you could have a traumatic experience but it doesn't lead to phobia. a dog would bite you, maybe many of you have been bitten by dogs, but you are not afraid of dogs. so, instead, psychologists lean towards what's called a preparedness theory which is that you're psychologically ready for phobias due to evolution, due to certain other factors, you're ready to be phobic, and then certain things might trigger it off. one of the advantage of the preparedness theory is it explains why the things that we're most afraid of are the things that would be dangerous to us in our ancestral environment. so, spiders and snakes are very common phobic objects even though in a modern world, they're pretty harmless. while cars and guns are not typical objects or phobias even though in the modern world, they're quite dangerous. another anxiety disorder is obsessive compulsive disorder. obsessions are irrational disturbing thoughts. these give rise to compulsions which are repetitive actions that exists to alleviate the obsessions. so, for instance, some common obsessions would be checking and washing, so you're obsessed with the idea that you forgot to lock your doors or that you've left one of your children behind so you check them and you count them. everybody does this to some extent or take washing. you could be obsessed with the idea you're filthy and dirty, and so the obsession leads to compulsion of washing. now, again, obviously, this sort of makes sense in real life. i think my hands are dirty and i want to wash them. but the problem with obsessive compulsive is they're obsessed with it, they can't stop washing their hands even though at some intellectual level, they know they're not dirty. we know that there are some genetic predisposition to ocd and we know that there's a biological basis it involves to some extent in some mysterious way the neurotransmitter serotonin. so, we know that drugs that reduce serotonin may often help treat people with obsessive compulsive disorders.
now, we're going to turn to a different sort of disorder. the set of disorders known as dissociative disorders. dissociation is literally a dissociation of yourself from your memory. you forget things. you become unaware of some aspect of your identity or your history. you're unable to remember certain things that happened or certain ways in which you were. now, some amount of dissociation is normal. you could forget things, obviously, but also in experiences with drugs, with alcohol, with a lack of sleep, you can have something which is akin to a dissociative disorder. but the disorders, of course, are far more serious than that and go beyond temporary, and there are three types of disorders; dissociative amnesia, dissociative fugue and dissociative identity disorders. in dissociative amnesia, it's also known as psychogenic amnesia, its just memory loss. you lose part of your memory and it's typically selective. you might know who you are, you might know most of your past. though, in some cases it could be global. you could lose all of your memory. it's a sort of hollywood loss of memory where you say, who am i, i have no idea where did i come from. often this happens after a traumatic event, after some sort of terrible event, like a disaster where you see everybody around you die. often in criminal situations, say when people are charged with murder, many of them claim to have no memory of what happened and this could be because of the trauma of the event. it could be because people tend to lie under these situations and they aren't describing things accurately. it could also be because in a lot of crimes, drugs and alcohol are involved and this could lead to some sort of dissociative amnesia. a second type of dissociative disorder is dissociative fugue, also known as psychogenic fugue, and it's just like dissociative amnesia. a global sort where you lose all your memory. except you travel, you leave your home, you go to some other place, you develop a new identity with no recollection of your former life, and when you're gone, when you're living this other identity, this is known as a fugue state. then, when the fugue state wears off, you're previous identity comes back. you're back to where you were and you might lose all of your memory of where you went and what you did during your fugue state. as you can imagine, this is a very rare disorder and it's quite fascinating. the third sort of dissociative disorder is dissociative identity disorder, and if you didn't hear about it from that name, you've heard of the expression multiple personality disorder. the idea is that person has two or more distinct personalities that are manifested at different times. there are famous cases of the sibyl, trudy chase, eve. it's been used as a criminal defense including by the hillside strangler, mass murder from way back, and it's definitely the stuff of fiction. the phenomena of it begins at around childhood before the age of 10. most people who are diagnosed with this disorder are women. in most reports, some sort of terrible torture or sexual abuse as children and show signs of post-traumatic stress disorder. so, one way to think about it is that all of this abuse early on leads to the creation of an alternative self, a splitting. but then again, many people who are horribly abused don't develop dissociative identity disorder. then, so you can tell a similar story that you've seen with regard to anxiety disorders and depression and schizophrenia, where there's a predisposition towards dissociation. then some sort of series of negative events causes this predisposition to blow up into full-blown disorder. but what i'll end by pointing out is that this is extremely controversial. so, a recent survey suggests that less than a quarter of psychiatrists believe there really is such a thing as associative identity disorders and the statistics are interesting. it used to be that these were extremely rare and then in the 80s they exploded, particularly in the united states where thousands upon thousands of cases were reported. many of them were reported by the same therapist or some therapists that seem to specialize in finding cases of dissociative identity disorder, and so several really interesting questions arise. one is, is dissociative identity disorder the product of therapy itself, where well-meaning therapist often get patients to reenact or play act in different voices experiences that have happened to them, and could this cause dissociative identity disorder to emerge in a patient who otherwise wouldn't have had one. a second question, which is explored by philosophers like dan dennett, is to what extent is dissociative identity disorder, to what extent it exists an extreme version of normal psychology. so, i'm one person when i'm with my wife, i'm another person when i'm with my colleagues and i'm yet another person when i'm with my parents. my personality is a little bit different. i talk a bit differently, maybe i act a bit differently, and in some vague sense, you can call this different personalities. what one wonders is, the extremes of dissociative identity disorder, again, assuming that this is a real phenomenon, may just be an extreme version of the sort of splitting we undergo in everyday life, and i think this is interesting because it's yet another example of how the study of abnormal psychology, of psychopathology, can tell us something about everyday life. the study of mood disorders and anxiety disorders can tell us about our sadness and our anxiety even for people who don't have psychological issues, and perhaps the dissociative disorders could tell us a little bit about everyday dissociation.
i want to end our discussion of psychological disorders by talking about personality disorders. so, personality, as you know, is one way of relating to the world of getting along with other people. but when one's personality becomes sufficiently extreme in certain ways, many psychologists categorize it as a disorder. some of them are self-explanatory. paranoid, it's different from paranoid schizophrenic, there are no delusions or hallucinations. but you believe that people are against you, people are plotting against you, you're concerned about yourself. narcissistic is just what it sounds like and so it's dependent. histrionic means you blow things out of proportion, you take things too extreme. borderline refers to an unstable and seemingly difficult person. so, personality disorders are controversial. they're controversial in different ways than a disorder like dissociative identity disorder. dissociative identity disorder or multiple personality disorder, it's something which people are not certain exists. everybody agrees that these extremes of personality exist, that there are people you could call a narcissistic or borderline or whatever. but what's not really clear is are they really disorders in an interesting sense, in the same sense as major depressive disorder or schizophrenia, or are they just different sorts of people. maybe sorts of people who you don't tend to get along with our like but it's not entirely clear that they're disorders in the same sense. also, they're notably hard to treat and maybe they're hard to treat because they're not disorders people have but just ways people can be. now, one sort of personality disorder that has received an enormous amount of attention is antisocial personality disorder. you might know this better from the phrase "moral insanity", which is an old phrase but in particular, sociopathy or psychopathy. now, some psychiatrists and clinicians view psychopathy and antisocial personality disorder as separate disorders but many glom them together. the symptoms are quite similar. if you have it, you're typically male and you're selfish, callous, impulsive and promiscuous. you have a deficit in love, loyalty, guilt or anxiety. you're easily bored, you seek out stimulation. as you can see, these straight, selfishness, callousness, et cetera, are not good traits nor is it good to have a deficit in these things. psychopaths are not surprisingly more likely to commit crimes and do cruel things to one another, so it's a disorder. if we could snap our fingers, most of us would very much like it to go away. one thing to keep in mind, when people think of these disorders, they often think of these extreme insane killers both in real life and in fiction like hannibal lecter from silence of the lambs. but in reality, whenever i think of somebody of antisocial personality disorder, i think of james bond. in particular, james bond is played by sean connery, a ruthless killer, promiscuous, without guilt, et cetera. many of you may know psychopaths or some debate over whether they're successful psychopaths, whether they are people who have these psychopathic disorders but do very well in the world, often reaching positions of great power.
the final part of our discussion of mental illness is treatment for mental illness or therapy. i'm going to go through this fairly quickly, just because there's so much to say, i can hardly give it justice. i just want to give a feeling for the sorts of therapies that exists and then end with some general observations about their efficacy and how they work. if people are interested in pursuing there's many other sources, both for people who are interested in more of the theory of how to treat mental disorders. but also as i mentioned at the onset, many of you suffer from problems yourself, or people you love suffer from problems, and there are many excellent resources online or otherwise on how to deal with these problems. i often get email from people who see my course from different countries, and they talk about issues that they are suffering from. my first response always is to see a therapist. it's to see somebody often at your campus or workplace, and talk it through. it may not help, you may need to do something else or see a different person but it rarely hurts, and it's always a good step. now, there are many different forms of therapy. one sort of classic form of therapy is psychodynamic therapy, it's built at ideas of freud. the idea of psychodynamic therapy is that the problems that people struggle with that bring them to the therapist's office are symptoms. you should focus instead on underlying causes. classical freudian psychoanalysis is a lengthy process, often going on for years, involving many sessions a week, and involves techniques like free association, the therapist might say some words and the patient will say something back, and dream analysis, where dreams are explored in order to give insight into what the mental problem is. there's behavior therapy, motivated directly by ideas of b.f. skinner. one example of this is in psychiatric hospitals or token economies, where people, the techniques of operant conditioning are used to reinforce good behaviors and diminish bad behaviors. but as a less extreme example, many of the treatments of phobia use the techniques of classical conditioning, where objects that would frighten you, instead of being associated with fear, you learned to associate them with relaxation and calm. i said before that the behaviors theory of the origin of phobias does not seem pretty well-founded, but interestingly enough the techniques for getting rid of phobias developed through behavior therapy do work pretty well. the most common form of therapy these days, at least in united states, is cognitive therapy, where the idea is you talk with your therapist, and you try to identify incorrect distorted ways of thinking. you might for instance think that you're a failure, and that a small catastrophe will ruin your life. but when you talk it over, and you realize that typically we're exaggerating how important things are, how permanant problems are, which often over-attribute them to ourselves. i'm dividing these up right now, as if they are sees bright lines, freudian skinnerian behaviorist, and cognitive. but typically a good therapists run summed together. a very common mode of treatment is what's called cbt; cognitive behavioral therapy, which brings together the techniques to work under distorted thoughts, along with techniques, and being trained to improve your behaviors. there is of course, medical interventions medications. these include antipsychotics for schizophrenics, anti-anxiety drugs for people with anxiety disorders like obsessive compulsive disorder, and of course antidepressants which are very common. there's also different sorts of interventions like electroconvulsive therapy or ect in which electric current is run through your brain. this has had a horrible reputation in movies and popular media but in fact, when it comes to severe depression, it is quite efficacious. it's nobodies first resort, but if talk therapy and medication fails, electroconvulsive therapy can often save people's lives. recently, there's a lot of interest in transcranial magnetic stimulation, it's a very new technology involving also running highly directed pulses of electrical energy into the brain, and it has some promise in treating disorders like depression. again, i'm talking about these separately, but they tend to run together. so, you might meet a therapist, and talk to your problems of him or her. but at the same time, if the therapist is a psychiatrist, he or she might prescribe a zoloft or wellbutruin, or some other medication for your problems. so, does any of this work? well, people do report feeling better after therapy, but that doesn't tell you that much, because maybe they would have gotten better anyway. there's something statisticians call regression to the mean. so, people's moods like everything else, just tends to go up and down more or less randomly often as sort of directional trends, but they go up and down. a point at which you enter therapy is often when you're at your worst. well, there's one thing about when things are at their worst, they typically get better. so, the getting better after therapy might just be the normal ebb and flow of one's moods or ones behaviors, or one's happiness. this no doubt plays a role, but the people interested in therapy are very conscious of this problem, and sort of experiments in the typically use control groups, a good study for instance when you have about 100 people who are looking to get some sort of therapy, they all sign up for therapy, and 50 of them get treatment, and 50 of them are put on a waiting list. it turns out typically, almost regardless of the therapy, people who get the therapy do better than people who didn't. maybe they both improve, but they improve more after under therapy. so, in general, there is some conclusions you can make, the first is what i just said, people in treatment do better than those who are not in treatment. we know some sorts of therapies work better for specific problems, so if you have a major depression, you might do well with cognitive behavioral therapy, cbt, along with some medication, while if you have bipolar disorder, medication is extremely efficient for that. we also know, and this is perhaps no surprise, that some therapists are better than others. finally, there's what you could call nonspecific factors in therapy's effectiveness. nonspecific, meaning they're not related to the specific principles, the logic of freudian therapy or cognitive therapy and the like, but they do play a role in the therapy success. these are general features of all forms of therapy share. one is support. you're dealing with a person who accepts you, who feels empathy for you, who encourages you, who guides you, somebody who is on your side. finally, there's hope. when you go into therapy there's some sense of faith that this will work. you're taking a shot at it, but you wouldn't be there if you didn't think it had some chances of success. this sort of hope could be a self-fulfilling prophecy. believing something will work is often an excellent first step to making it work. this is yet another reason why therapy is often a powerful mechanism for improving people's lives.
there's a lot of psychology that focuses on human misery and this was the topic of clinical psychology, something which we talked about last lecture. so, we have a big book of mental disorders. the dsm-5, it'll grow to become the dsm-6 and will chronicle all the problems that we have to deal with as individuals and as psychologists. but recently, there's been a movement in psychology looking at human thriving. trying to explore not the bad side of things but the good side of things, what psychology can tell us about living a good life. this is sometimes known as positive psychology. i want to end the class on this note, i find this stuff extremely interesting and extremely relevant to daily life. so much so, i'm going to do something at the beginning of this lecture that i haven't done before which is going to recommend some readings. so, there's the bible of positive psychology by martin seligman as one of the founders. there's a wonderful book by jonathan haidt called the happiness hypothesis which connects happiness research that ancient wisdom from philosophers. there's a book by daniel nettle called happiness which is i find to be a wonderful short introduction. then, there's a wonderful book called stumbling on happiness by daniel gilbert which focuses on our abilities and inabilities to predict how happy we'll be in the future. a lot of the work i'm going to talk about in this set of lectures is drawn upon these readings.
so, to get things going, i want to ask you a question. the question is, how happy are you? how happy is your life? it's a very vague question but try to answer it in your head. put it on a scale from one to ten. now, this question has been asked over and over again across many countries and across thousands, many thousands of people, and almost nobody answers ten. but most people do think that they're substantially happier than the midpoint, common answers are seven and eight. so, one study did this across 42 countries, and they found that none of them had an average happiness under five. in this one study, the most happier were the swiss, the most miserable were the bulgarians, and the americans racked up as pretty happy, on the happy scale. now, i'm going to use these numbers for a lot of the studies we're going to talk about later on, and it's worthwhile being skeptical as to what these answers can mean. so, i do think that your answer to the question has some real value. it predicts all sorts of aspects of your life. it seems to have real meaning, but at the same time any single reading isn't perfectly reliable and could be swayed by small effects. so, in one study for instance, they tested people on psychology department, and half of the people right before they were asked how happy they were found a dime, the other half didn't. it turned out when asked how good your whole life is, the people who found a dime were happier. in a similar result, people are more positive about their whole life when you ask them on sunny days. when it's a rainy day, people are net less positive about her whole life, unless you remind them of the weather. once they know about the whether, they can use this information to recalibrate and then they're more accurate. so, what is happiness? well, we have an evolutionary answer. happiness for an evolutionary psychologist is a goal-state that animals have evolved to pursue. when you're happy, that means your needs have been satisfied. so, for instance, hunger is unpleasant if you're really hungry or you'll be miserable. but being full is pleasant, and so you're satiated and you're happy. steve pinker sums this up quite nicely. he notes, "we are happier when we are healthy, well-fed, comfortable, safe, prosperous, knowledgeable, respected, non-celibate, and loved. if you look in your life and you could tick off all of these things, then my bet is that you are pretty darn happy. but then, pinker notes himself that it's not quite that simple. there's a couple of reasons why, there's a couple of facts that should shake your perception that happiness is a simple matter. one is that people right now, americans in the 21st century and i meant many of you from outside united states who are listening to this and watching this, you're healthier, better fed, safer, than just about any other time in history, but you don't seem to be happier. so, it's not like people get progressively happier as their status in life increases, also there are individual differences in happiness. we'd all be in the same community and we all have our basic needs met, but some people are very happy and some people aren't happy at all. to explain these facts and to learn a little bit more about what makes us happy and how happiness works and how one can cultivate happiness in one's life, we need to keep in mind three quite surprising facts about happiness.
the first interesting fact about happiness is that it doesn't change as much as you think. and one way to look at it is, you have a set point. just as with regard to possibly weight, temperament, or intelligence, there is a heritability of happiness. so there's a genetically determined range of how happy you're likely to be. and we see this for instance, in that, identical twins raised apart in very different environments tend to be similarly happy. and this to some extent is common sense, some people are naturally cheerful, and positive, and joyous. others are more reticent, and maybe glum and less happy. this doesn't mean that a miserable person can't achieve great happiness, or a very happy person can't become glum. but just as with other psychological traits, it does mean that to some extent, there are powerful influences on us even before we're born, happiness is heritable. now, an immediate, very sensible response to this is, what about life events? certainly, life events will change your happiness one way or another. and think of it as, what's the worst thing that could happen to you? imagine that for a second, and then ask, how much would it change your happiness? then ask, what's the best thing that can happen to you? and ask, how much would it change your happiness? it turns out that the answer's somewhat surprising. there have been studies looking at response to different life events including becoming a paraplegic in an accident. winning an enormous sum of money. [sound] for professors, either getting tenure or not getting tenure. if you get tenure you have job security for life, if you don't get tenure you have a bit of time, then you have to leave and find a new job. or they ask people right before a presidential election, in the united states, between mitt romney and barack obama. how happy they would be if their person won and if their person lost. and it turns out for all of these, these events do have some influence on happiness. but it's not a large influence. and even the most influential, most powerful sorts of events like becoming paralyzed, make you miserable. for six months, for a year, and then you tend to get back to where you started from. not perfectly, but we tend to get used to both positive and negative events. and there are couple of reasons why. one is that for some things we just fail to appreciate that certain things are irrelevant. so in the heat of an election campaign, when you ask somebody, how would you feel if your candidate loses? people might say, honestly, i'd feel miserable, i'm going to spend the next four years miserable. but the truth is, in day-to-day life, most of the time, you don't even think about who's president, it doesn't make any difference for you. and to a surprising extent, the things that you might think are incredibly important, like, i might win a tremendous prize and then think that'll make me very happy. for 99.99% of my life, the prize doesn't seem to make that much of a difference. i still have to deal with my family and take out the laundry and engage in my work. day-to-day life is often simply uninfluenced by things at the time seem very important. and then the second reason why these events don't matter very much is the logic of the set point where you have a basic amount of how happy you'll be. and then when events happen, you adapt to them, and what this means is you simply get used to them. so you get used to certain bad things, your life is worse but you don't always feel it as worse. there's some surprising exceptions to this, happiness, researchers argue, you never really get used to a long commute. if you're miserable commuting to work on day one, you're going to be miserable a year later. and you don't adapt well to background noise, if there's loud noises that are distracting and annoying, you never fully get used to them. but for the most part, we adapt to bad things and we adapt to good things. so if i win a prize, if i get a great job, it's wonderful at the beginning and then you just get used to it. this is a variant of something we talked about early on in the course, habituation. there's some exceptions that some form of cosmetic surgery for instance, actually do make you happier. maybe because how you see yourself and how others see you is something which is just long-lasting and pervasive in a surprising extent. now, this is an old insight, there is a wonderful passage in the bible in ecclesiastes. where a king had everything, gardens, parks, vineyards, castles, slaves, concubines. and then it goes on to say, i hated life, he says, all is vanity and a chasing after wind, and there is nothing to be gained under the sun. let's zoom in a little bit and ask about bad events, so how is it we adapt to bad events? a bad event like losing your job, losing a great sum of money, a breakup with somebody you love. all sorts of bad events, everything all the way up to becoming paralyzed. and there's different answers, so one answer i gave is that these bad events often don't affect as much of your life as you think they will. a second answer is, we simply get used to it, and that's adaptation. but a third answer is defended by dan gilbert, who talks about the psychological immune system. and the psychological immune system is a psychological mechanism that makes in a normal, a highly-functioning non-depressed person, makes you seek out the good side of things. gilbert gives many examples of good people who, terrible things have happened. they've been falsely imprisoned and they look back and say, that was the best thing in my life. and this may be irrational but it seems to make us happier. and it seems to make us be able to better bounce back from bad events. there's a nice illustration of this in this very short, i think quite moving ted talk. [music] >> [applause] >> imagine, if you will, a gift, i would like you to picture it in your mind, it's not too big, perhaps the size of a golf ball, some vision what it looks like, all wrapped up. before i show you what's inside, i will tell you it's going to do incredible things for you. it will bring all of your family together, you will feel loved and appreciated like never before, and reconnect to friends and acquaintances you haven't heard from in years. adoration and admiration will overwhelm you, it will recalibrate what is most important in your life. it will redefine your sense of spirituality and faith. you'll have a new understanding and trust in your body. you'll have unsurpassed vitality and energy. you'll expand your vocabulary, meet new people, and you'll have a healthier lifestyle. and get this, you'll have an eight-week vacation of doing absolutely nothing. you'll eat countless gourmet meals, flowers will arrive by the truckload. people will say to you, you look great, have you had any work done? >> [laugh] >> and you'll have a lifetime supply of good drugs. you'll be challenged, inspired, motivated, and humbled. your life will have new meaning. peace, health, serenity, happiness, nirvana. the price, $55,000, and that's an incredible deal. by now, i know you're dying to know what it is and where you can get one. does amazon carry it? does it have the apple logo on it? is there a waiting list? not likely. this gift came to me about five months ago, it looked more like this when it was all wrapped up, not quite so pretty, and this, and then this. it was a rare gem, a brain tumor, hemangioblastoma, the gift that keeps on giving. and while i'm okay now, i wouldn't wish this gift for you, i'm not sure you'd want it, but i wouldn't change my experience. it profoundly altered in my life in ways i didn't expect, in all the ways i just shared with you. so the next time you're faced with something that's unexpected, unwanted, and uncertain, consider that it just may be a gift. >> [applause] [music] >> now, i think a lot of what psychologists have learned about happiness, in particular what i've talked about in this section, corresponds well to ancient wisdom. and the wisdom is, it's not so much what happens to you that determines how happy you are, it's how you perceive it. and so i'll end with two quotes, one is by john milton, and he attributes this to satan and paradise lost. the mind is its own place and in itself, can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven. and finally shakespeare, for there's nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it so.
the next set of findings has to do with the influences on happiness. there is indeed a set point that restrains the amount of happiness and we're able to bounce back from negative events and sadly positive events don't influence us as much. but none of this is to say that we aren't influenced by our world. we definitely are. for one thing, your life situation has an absolute effect on your happiness. so, the simplest illustration of this is, you go back to those data as to the happiness of people in different countries and then you look at how rich their country is, and what you find, and maybe this is common sense, but the richer the country, the happier the people are on average. similarly, happiness is largely influenced by how successful you are relative to the people around you. this is an insight that's nicely expressed by h.l. mencken, who wrote, "a wealthy man is one who earns $100 more than his wife's sister's husband," and what this means is, we think relatively. we are social creatures. we are hierarchical creatures, and we're exquisitely sensitive to where we stand relative to other people. you can see this as a thought experiment. would you rather make $70,000 if everybody else in your office makes 65,000, or 75,000 and everyone else in your office makes 80,000? well, your mileage may vary. i think a lot of people would simply choose the absolute number more, which is option b. but i think to some extent we'd be swayed by option a, where we're making absolutely less but we're making more relative to other people. in fact, the happiness literature suggests that one measure, one way to predict how happy somebody is, is not merely through their absolute income or absolute status in the world, but where they stand relative to other people, and some savvy negotiators know this. there's stories about maria carlos and stanley fish and they're both stories of the sort, they're negotiating and the one demand that they make isn't an absolute amount of money, it's they just want to make a little bit more than a person who's making the most money right now before they arrived. they want to be on the top, and they know that will make them happy. whatever number that is, that's not the point. we could wrap up a little bit and we can give some advice to our miserable king we saw earlier. one thing is he does seem depressed. so, i think antidepressants and cognitive behavioral therapy probably would help. we could work on some of the environmental influences that are making him miserable. his absolute income is great. his relative income is great. the status is fine, maybe he can move the castle to quieter part of the kingdom, and i guess i can't resist saying this, and this isn't so much grounded in specific empirical psychology but also just a broader moral view, which is, i think we get the most satisfaction, the most sustained benefit from long-term relationships and projects. so, i think he should give up on his concubines, find a queen, join a club and get involved in some charities to help other people.
the final insight on happiness i want to give you isn't really an insight on happiness actually. it's more on pleasure, on short-term pleasure, but it's so cool. i just have to talk about it. this is that our judgments about the pleasure and pain of past events are skewed in very interesting ways. this is the work of danny kahneman who was a famous psychologist. he won the nobel prize in economics for his work, including this sort of work. and here's the experiment i want to run on you, and ask you this question, what would you like better; a medical procedure that's very painful for an hour then it stops? imagine a dental procedure that's painful or a colonoscopy or anything, anything painful. that's option one. or option two is the same, exact same medical procedure, very painful for an hour. then the same procedure continues for five more minutes and it's mildly painful. then it stops. which would you prefer? a or b? now this might seem like the stupidest question in the world of course. a is better. the only difference between a and b is that b has more pain in it. so you'd rather have a. it turns out though, and kahneman did this research in all sorts of ways, including testing people who really were undergoing painful medical procedures, and they find that b leaves a better memory. well, why? why would it do that? the answer is that when we look back on past events and assessed their pleasure and pain, we tend to do so not by just summing up the amount of pleasure and pain that they experience, but instead focusing on peeks and endings. you remember the extremes, the biggest moment of pain, the greatest moment of pleasure, and you also remember how it ends. so this leads to an interesting, i think valuable finding, that if you had to distribute pain and pleasure across time, you're much better off putting the pleasure at the end and the pain everywhere else. so imagine a party that's hugely fun at the beginning but it ends badly. at the last minute of party you say something embarrassing, you spill something all over yourself, you get in an argument with a friend. as opposed to an awful party, this is b, that's just boring and unpleasant everything, but it ends just great. you know, a sudden kiss with somebody you've always admired, a very nice compliment, something goes really. well, you might think if you carefully calibrated the good and the bad, that a, would be much much better, but in the real world that is not quite so. endings matter so much that a good ending can override a whole lot of bad and a bad ending can destroy a whole lot of good. endings really do matter.
and this brings the course to an end. in this course, we've basically reviewed all of psychology, some more in-depth than others but you have a feeling for the whole field, and you're now in a position to answer questions about memory, depression, language, child development, how the brain works. you have some sense of why people are different and have different personalities. you have some understanding of the social influences on our lives, what makes us afraid, what leads to different forms of mental illness. you even have a little hint on what factors influence our happiness, and maybe you could use your knowledge to make you a little bit happier, yourself. now, the field of psychology is broad and we've just gotten started, but for some of you, this will be the last course you ever take in psychology. so, i want to end this course by focusing on two things. the first is a bit of humility. there are some very basic questions about the mind that nobody knows the answer to yet. we know that the brain is the source of mental life, but we don't have any real understanding of how a physical object, a lump of meat, can give rise to conscious experience. we haven't yet solved what philosophers call, the hard problem. we know that about half the variation in personality is a result of genes, and so too for intelligence and happiness, and many other things, but we don't really know how to explain where the other half comes from, what experiences make us what we are. we know about the social influences that can make us do certain things, including bad things, but we don't yet know why some people are immune to these influences, and act and sometimes do great and heroic things, regardless of the circumstances that they find themselves in. so, there's a lot left to do. but the second theme is more optimistic. this is the idea that will eventually come to answer these questions, to solve these problems, through the methods we've been discussing, through the series of lectures. this is the idea that in the end, the most important and intimate aspects of ourselves, our beliefs and emotions, the capacity to make decisions, our sense of right and wrong, can be explained through constructing, and testing scientific hypothesis. i think there's been some success stories where we really have learned some surprising and important things about the mind, and there's no reason to expect this way of proceeding to fail us in the future. now, some people may find this a scary prospect. i know that some people worry that a scientific approach to the mind takes a specialness away from people, it diminishes us somehow, but i don't agree. i have the opposite reaction actually. my view is the more you look at the mind and how it works from a serious scientific point of view, the more you appreciate its complexity, its uniqueness, and its beauty. and i'll end with that.
so congratulations, you've completed introduction to psychology and the question some of you are now asking is, now what? where do you go from here and there are a couple of types of answers to that question one is practical. so, you may be interested in pursuing some sort of graduate work or professional work or clinical work and while there's a lot more to know, this course could provide a good foundation for getting started in those directions. but for me, the more interesting answer to the "now what," question is intellectual. we've been dealing with some questions of extraordinary interest. how do children differ from adults? why are some of us racist? what memories fade away right away and what lasts for the rest of our lives? why do some people become mentally ill and others are resilient? and so on and so on. if you're interested in pursuing these questions further, there's a couple of ways to do so. one is, i provided a link to further readings, which i put in articles and books, contemporary readings that will allow you to build up your knowledge in these domains and second, there's discussion boards. you can delve into this discussion boards, tell your stories, make your arguments, ask questions, explore these issues. i don't promise to respond to everything but i do promise to read everything. so, i am delighted to have taught this course. i hope you got something out of it. congratulations and good luck.
so here's where things begin for real. i want to welcome people to the course and i want to welcome people to the first series of lectures, which is on the brain, on neuroscience. and i want to begin this series of lectures and the course itself, with a story about a man named phineas gage, and an event that happened to gage in the summer of 1848 in cavendish, vermont. so gage was a blasting foreman working on a railway construction project and his job, at that time, was to clear away rock so that they could lay down tracks. and to do so, his routine during those days, was that he would bore a hole in the rocks. inside the hole, he put blasting powder and a fuse in. then he would cover that up with dirt and sand and take a tamping iron, which he carried with him. a big piece of steel, looked like a javelin and use it to tamp down the sand and dirt, so that later they could set the fuse and cause the explosions. well one day, something didn't work. nobody's exactly sure why, maybe he just forgot to put in the sand and the dirt. but regardless, he put the tamping iron into the hole, the powder exploded. [sound] the tamping iron shot away from his hand and went into his face. it entered the left side of gage's jaw, moving in an upward direction, it passed behind the left eye through the left side of the brain and it went out the top of his skull and landed several feet away of the clutter. now miraculously gage wasn't killed on the spot. he lost consciousness for a little bit, but then he staggered to his feet. and in some regards, gage was very lucky. so he underwent a series of operations, he had infections, he got sick. at times, his life was at risk. but months later, he was, in certain regards, pretty much recovered. he was able to see, he wasn't deaf, he wasn't paralyzed, he didn't lose the ability to speak or understand language, he didn't lose his intellectual capacities in any simple way. but in another sense gage was very unlucky because gage has been transformed by this incident. someone who knew gage describes the transformation like this. before the accident gage was, quote the most efficient and capable man, a man of temperate habits, considerable energy of character, a sharp shrewd businessman. after the accident, gage was no longer gage. he was fitful, irreverent, indulging at times in the grossest profanity manifesting but little deference for his fellows. he ended up losing his job. he traveled through the states taking up different jobs, engaging in different relationships. and ultimately ended up in an exhibit in a travelling circus, holding a tamping iron and telling people about this terrible story about how it went through his head and went through his brain, and changed his life. so, why am i telling you this story? well, as i said, i want to begin the course by talking about the brain. and the story of phineas gage illustrates something which we have abundant reason to believe, which is that the brain is the source of mental life. and so damage to the brain can have profound effects on who we are and what we are. an idea here is nicely summarized by the nobel prize winning biologist francis crick, he calls it the astonishing hypothesis. as he writes, the astonishing hypothesis is that you, your joys and your sorrows, your memories and your ambitions, your sense of personal identity and free will, are in fact no more than the behavior of a vast assembly of nerve cells and their associated molecules. now this assembly of nerve cells is of course the brain, the brain and parts of the spinal cord, but we're going to talk about the brain here. an the idea then, as sometimes people like to put it the mind is the brain or that the mind is what the brain does or the mental life emerges from the brain. the official term for this is materialism that we are material beings. everybody accepts that our arms and legs and our heart and kidneys are made of the same sort of stuff as rabbits and automobiles and cups. but the idea is that our mental life, what makes us special, our most intimate feelings and thoughts also arise from these material things. and this the idea that makes possible the discipline of neuroscience and much of psychology.
we're talking about materialism, the idea that our mental life emerges from our physical brain. if you're listening closely, if you're thinking about this, i hope you acknowledged that this is an odd and unnatural view. i don't expect you to believe it, at least not at first. and in fact, for the most part, people are far more attracted to the doctrine called "dualism." dualism is an idea that's been found in just about every religion and every philosophy. it's made explicit in plato, for instance. but i think the most thoughtful and articulate defender of dualism was the philosopher, rene descartes. descartes believed that animals were material things. he thought that the doctrine of materialism was correct about non-human animals. "but humans are different," descartes argued. for humans, there's a duality. we possess two sorts of things. we are composed of two sorts of things. we are in part material, but we're also in part spiritual, separate, mental, psychological. in some way that doesn't reduce to the material. he made two arguments for this, and they're both reasonably good arguments, at least quite persuasive at his time, and have persuaded many people and continue to persuade many people. the first arguments for a non-material nature is that humans are capable of doing things that no machine, no material entity ever could. so, it might surprise you to hear this, but descartes in the 17th century was familiar with robots. he knew about the french royal gardens, which is like a 17th century disneyland or euro disney, which had robots that react when you approach them or when you step on certain stones. for instance, you might approach diana, and then neptune would jump out from the bushes holding a trident. this was done not of electricity, but with water. so, descartes knew about these robots, and descartes asked, "well, maybe we're such things, maybe we're just machines responding to the environment." and he said that we can't be. he said maybe animals, non-human animals can be, but human behavior is far more complicated, and variegated, and subtle to be explained in such simple ways. we'll return to this point later on in the course when we talk about noam chomsky and noam chomsky's critique of behaviorism, which argued that basically humans respond in a relatively reflexive way to environmental stimuli. descartes along with chomsky said, "that can't be. our behavior's far too complicated for that. so, we can't be machines." his second argument is probably better now, and it's based on intuition. and his claim was we don't feel like bodies. so, to put it more technically, he applied what was called a method of doubt. he asked the question, "what do we know for sure, and what can we question?" so, for instance, you might believe you were born in such and so place. you could be wrong. you could be deceived. you might believe that the earth is thousands or millions of years old. but maybe the earth was created 100 years ago and all the memories that your grandparents have of the past were just manufactured. you might believe, said descartes, that you live in a world of things, that you're sitting on a chair or there's a wall in front of you or there's a computer near your hands. but descartes observe that we often believe such things when we're in dreams, but weren't mistaken. he observed that people who are mentally ill, or were deranged in some way, might have such beliefs, but don't be mistaken. so, you could be wrong that there's a physical world around you. you could be wrong that there is a body that you have. this is an ancient concern of course, but it's best articulated in the movie, the matrix, which maintains that we think we're running around in the physical world, but actually, with the lucky exception of our heroes like neo and trinity, we're actually just plugged into some sort of system. another version of this is that we're brains in a vat. if you were a brain, just the brain sitting in a vat with electrical wires stimulating your experiences, you couldn't help. maybe you are such things. modern-day philosophers for instance, will argue that there's an excellent chance that we are simulations, we computer simulations. so, descartes and people following descartes said, "there's a lot we can't be sure of. the things that we are seemingly most confident about in real world can't be shaken." but descartes said, "there's one thing you can't doubt. you can't doubt your own consciousness. you can't doubt your own existence." the famous line is, "i think, therefore i am." and spelling out this intuition, building from the fact you could doubt that you have a body, but you can't doubt that you have a mind. descartes wrote, "i knew that i was a substance the whole essence or nature of which is to think, and that for its existence there is no need of any place, nor does it dependent in a material thing.. that is to say, the soul by which i am what i am, is entirely distinct from body." so, that's a philosophical case for dualism. but as i said, dualism is also emerged out of common sense. think about how you describe your body. you describe your body's if you possess it. my arm, my heart, my body, my brain, as if it's something separate from you that you have. or consider your intuitions about personal identity. so, typically, as people age, their consciousness follows their body. so, i get 10 years older, my mind 10 years older, my brain is 10 years older, it all connects together, but we easily accept at least infection that people can hop from one body to another. there are many comedies that involve body switching, body swamps. there are movies that involve somebody going to sleep one morning as one person and waking up as another. we understand they're fiction, they aren't real. but they make sense to us. there's an intuitive rationale to this. we don't walk out of the theory and say, "i am totally confused what happened there." rather, at least with our naive conception of the self, we accept that least of the possibility, that you can hop from one body to another. none of this is limited to modern-day movies, the most famous short story of history by franz kafka begins with the sentence, "as gregor samsa awoke one morning from uneasy dreams, he found himself transformed in his bed into a gigantic insect." metamorphosis involves that transformation and along before that in ulysses the characters are transformed. some of the characters are transformed by an evil witch into pigs. it's non of you took to people and turn them into pigs rather it's much worse. they put them in the body of pigs. as the passage goes, "they had the head and voice, and bristles, and body of swine; but their minds remained unchanged as before. so they were penned there, weeping." our conception that bodies and cells are separate, allows us to accept idea you had many people inhabiting one body. this is how many people think about multiple personality disorder, something we'll get to quite later on the course. it's also at the root of a view that many people; both religious and non-religious hold, which is the idea of demonic possession. your body can be taken over by somebody else. another manifestation of dualism, is you could believe in intelligent beings without bodies. if mind and body are separate it raises the possibility you could have one without the other. plainly you got to have bodies without minds. that's what a corpse is. but the argument goes you could also have minds without bodies. this is for instance what many people think about gods or angels. which are the immaterial beings that can think, that can observe, that can act, but they don't have physical bodies in the same sense that we do. finally, and maybe most important for people, the idea that of dualism, the idea you are not your physical body, raises what must be for many and incredibly appealing consequence, which is that you can survive the destruction of the body. in fact, if you ask most people; religious and non-religious, what will happen after you body is destroyed? the answer is not well, i'm dead then, that's it. it's the end of things. but rather the belief is that you can live on. maybe you'll end up in some spirit world, maybe you will ascend to heaven, if you're unlucky maybe will descend to hell. maybe you'll occupy some other body as an reincarnation. but the idea is that the destruction of your body need not be the destruction of you because you are not your body. all of these beliefs, the beliefs about personal identity, the beliefs about life after death, about the existence of supernatural beings. about god. all rest at least to some extent, on a dualist perspective. so, materialism, which says dualism is just playing wrong is an audacious view, and should be treated as such. you shouldn't just shrug and write it down. you should grapple with it, you should worry about it. you should either be grudgingly accepted or fight against it. so, why are modern-day psychologists and neuroscientists so confident that dualism is mistaken? well, there are a few problems with it. one is that it simply doesn't help us explain certain things that need to be explained. appealing to an immaterial world to an immaterial soul seems to dock certain questions that really do deserve an answer. so, throughout this course we'll ask questions like, how do we learn language? what do we find sexually attractive? how does memory work? these are questions about ourselves, about our minds. to say, "oh, it all happens some immaterial realm", leaves us hopeless when it comes to answering them. the second concern is that at the time, descartes was correct, to infer from the limitations of material things physical things, that we probably are not physical things. but by now we have a much better understanding what physical things can do which makes it entirely possible for many of us that we are set things. so, i'm thinking for instance of computers and robots. for descartes, the idea that a physical thing can do something as complicated as play a game of chess would seem ludicrous. but now of course we know that physical things and if you're looking at a computer you are looking at such a physical thing, can do exactly that. they can understand language, they could recognize objects, they could store things in memory, they can make inferences, and so on. now, for some of these things, they don't do it anywhere near as well as people do. so, when we talk about language development for instance we see that, a two-year-old child uses and understands language better than any computer around. so, we need to bear that in mind. but still, it's no longer nuts to say that physical thing can do all of the rich and psychologically diverse and psychologically complicated things that people do. which means that we have to take seriously the claim that we are in fact such physical things. the final consideration is that there's tremendous evidence that the brain is in fact the roots of mental life. so, put aside all that philosophical abstract, arguments, there's just tons of direct evidence. to some extent that direct evidence has always been there. you don't have to be born in the 20th or 21st century to appreciate that getting hit in the head could affect your consciousness and your memory. to appreciate that diseases like syphilis can lead to disruption of the will and of consciousness. alzheimer's can rob you of your rationality. that coffee and alcohol can inflame the passions. it just is so evident in everyday life that if physical events that affect the brain can affect ourselves, suggesting that at the very least, our mental life is intimately connected to the brain. over recent years something else has happened, which is we've developed technologies that allow us to look directly into the brain. look at the brains activation, and infer from patterns of the brain activation what people are thinking. so, very crudely, you can put somebody into a scanner, an fmri scanner, and you could tell whether or not are thinking about language, or music, or sex. the technology is increasing. there is such a point that is not implausible that for some of you by the time you're listening to this, we can put a sleeping person under fmri scanner, and know from neural patterns of neural firings, know what they're dreaming. all of this i think it is very difficult to keep this in mind, and hold on to the view of dualism. i think materialism however uncomfortable, however unpalatable is a view that the science forces us to adopt.
so, what is the physical seed of thought? what is the source of our emotions, or decision-making, our passions, or pains, and everything else? well, it's the brain, and it's set to be the most complex mechanism in the known universe. you might expect, given all it is, and given all it does, that will look very pretty, philips shimmering lights and glass tubes, and mysterious colors. but in fact, it looks really kind of gross, it looks a the three-day old meatloaf. it's gray when you take it out of the head, and inside the head it's bright red because of all the blood. in fact, it turns out very surprisingly that the source of our mental life, of our consciousness is meat. in fact, you could eat it, people have eaten brains, i've had brain with cream sauce, not human brain, mind you, but i've had brain with cream sauce. it's not bad. but it makes the puzzle all the more harder, how can this fleshy thing give rise to mental life? that's the question i want to explore in this lecture, and the rest of the lectures. i want to do so by starting with the smallest relevant parts, different parts of neurons. then explore how the neurons are connected together, how they're wired up, how they form different subparts of the brain, like the hypothalamus and the frontal lobe. finally, talking about the brain, and the larger perspective, looking at the two halves of the brain, the left half and right half, and how they interact. now, there's a lot of stuff in the brain, a lot of chemical stuff, a lot of different parts, but where the action is, the part that does the thinking, the part that is the focus of most of our research, is the neurons. it's not an accident they call the study of the biological basis of thought neuroscience, because it all comes from the neurons. so, you can see here pictures of neurons interacting together. here's a diagram that depicts a typical neuron. so, what you see is the dendrites, and dendrites receive signals from other neurons. either excitatory, like pluses, or inhibitory, minuses. then they get to the cell body, which sums up these pluses and minuses. when you reach a certain threshold, a certain amount of pluses, there's neural firing. firing takes place through the axon, and the axon is much longer than the dendrites. in fact, for some motor neurons, it's very long indeed. there's axons running from your spinal cord, all the way to your big toe. you could think of it of the relative sizes of things in terms of a basketball, and a 40-mile garden hose. surrounding the axon is what's called a myelin sheath. the myelin sheath is- you can think of it as insulation, as fatty tissue like insulation on a wire. so, the information comes through the dendrites, and summed up in the cell body, and it's transmitted through the axon. so, what neurons do, is they sum up and transmit information, and we know that there's a lot of them. by some estimates, it's 100 billion, or the estimates tend to be very different and very rough, but there's billions upon billions of neurons, and each connect to thousands, maybe tens of thousands of other neurons. so, the fact that you have something of this degree of complexity, this degree of structure, structure which there's no way to replicate in any machine, the numbers are just too big is why people might describe the brain as the most complicated machine in the universe. at least this is fitting, it's made of meat maybe. which is kind of disappointing, but at least it shows its incredible internal structure. so, neurons come in three flavors. there are sensory neurons, which take in information from the environment, from the external world. there's motor neurons, which go from the brain out to your motor control. so, if you touch something hot, and you feel the pain, that is sensory neurons, if you rent your hand back, or you reach for something, that's motor neurons. finally, there's interneurons, which connect different neurons without making contact with external world. either through sensation, or through motor action. now, the main thing to think about for neurons and neuron firing is that it's all or nothing. it's like firing a gun, or sneezing. neurons either fire, or they don't. now, you might think that's a little bit strange, particularly, when you think about sensory neurons, because your experience seems to be a continuum. so, you have sensory neurons in your eyes, and you can distinguish from a very dim light, and a very bright light. you have sensory neurons in your fingers, and you could distinguish between gently touching something, versus being stabbed on the tip of your finger, or something. but still the neurons are all or nothing, the way we get to this continuity of experience is that neurons can code for intensity in different ways. so, one way is in terms of the number of neurons that fire. if x neurons corresponds to a mild experience, x times 10 neurons may correspond to an intense experience. another factor is the impulse frequency of individual neurons, an individual neuron might denote a mild sensation by doing fire, fire, fire, fire. well, it might denote an intense situation with fire, fire, fire, fire, fire, fire. so, you have neurons, and the neurons talk to each other, they talk to each other because axons, an axon of one neuron will communicate with the dendrites of another neuron. a long time ago, people used to think that neurons were wired up together like a computer, but in fact, neurons don't actually touch one another. there is a gap between the axon terminal of one neuron, and the dendrite of another one. a very tiny gap, typically of like 1/110,000 of a meter wide. this gap is known as a synapse. when one neuron fires, the axon releases neurotransmitters, these are chemicals that shoot out over that gap, and affect dendrites and other neurons. as i said before, the effect of these neurotransmitters could be excitatory, which is that they raise the energy, so they increase the likelihood of a neuron firing, or inhibitory. so that they bring down the likelihood of a neuron firing. what's interesting is that different neurons shoot out different neurotransmitters. so, they have different effects on other neurons that they made contact with. in fact, a lot of psychopharmacology, both attempts to cure various psychological or physical diseases by giving medicines, or recreational psychopharmacology designed to increase pleasure of different forms, or sometimes help people work, or help people focus. works by fiddling with the neurotransmitters and this can be either antagonists, they lower down intensity of things by binding to the dendrites, making it hard to create more neurotransmitters, or they can increase the amount of neurotransmitters available in different ways agonists. so, you're either pumping up the volume or turning down the volume. so, you think about different drugs and their effects. there's a curare. curare, is a drug that used by south american indians. it's a antagonist. it blocks motor neurons from affecting their muscle fibers. it keeps your motor neurons from working, and what it does is it paralyzes you, and in large enough doses, it kills you, because motor neurons also keep your heart beating. so, shut that down and you die. there's alcohol. now, alcohol also has an inhibitory effect. you might think that's strange because when i drink alcohol i get all excited and happy and goofy. but you have to keep this in mind here, the way alcohol works is, it inhibits part of your brain that does the inhibition. so, you have part of your brain that says, don't say that to the other person, keep your pants on, stop yelling, and alcohol basically inhibits that part of the brain, making you more exuberant. then, over the course of things, in the course of drinking too much, it also inhibits other parts of the brain. so, you could pass out and fall on the floor, and in large enough doses, die. so, both curare and alcohol, in different ways bring things down. other drugs bring things up. so, amphetamines, for instance, increase the amount of norepinephrine, which is another neurotransmitter, that's responsible for genetic general arousal, and this is how drugs like speed or cocaine work. other drugs like prozac or l-dopa, influence neurotransmitters in ways that they increase, for instance, the supply of dopamine or serotonin. which can be relevant for issues like parkinsons, which seems to be related to too little dopamine, and depression, which is related to too little serotonin. so, these drugs work by influencing neurotransmitters, either by directly pumping in more neurotransmitters, or increasing the supply in different ways, or stopping them from having effects by binding them or sucking them up in different ways, but they work through their effects on neurotransmitters. so, the more general idea is, the way neurons lead to thinking, is that they form clusters or networks. these clusters and networks, are computational devices that do interesting things like recognizing faces, or walking up right, or understanding sentences, or doing math, or experiencing great sadness, or falling in love, and so on. we now know that, that's possible, because we create computing machines that work in certain ways. that if you wire up a computing machine in certain complicated ways, it can do mathematics, play chess, do flight simulator, and so on. so, you may be interested in the project of computational neuroscience which tries to ask the question, how are neurons wired up to do interesting things, and uses our own success at computational theory as a model. then, sometimes takes the inference the other way around, which is you can see how people do it, and then use this knowledge of how people do it, to create computational systems that can do it as well. so, how is the brain wired up? well, you might imagine that it's wired up like a portable computer, like a laptop, like the sort of computer you're looking at now. into some regards it is, but there's a couple of reasons why it can't be, and both of them have to do with how well the brain works. so, first, the brain is highly resistant to damage. if you get a knife to the brain, if you get damage to the brain, it won't typically shut down the whole system. the information and capacitors somehow distributed across neurons in such a way that makes them extremely resilient to damage. while in contrast, somebody could open up the back of your laptop, pull out a chip and the whole thing is ruined, the whole thing will stop working. but the brain is wired up in a certain way that makes it highly resilient. the second thing is, the brain is wired up in such a way that makes it work very fast. so, computers can do millions of operations per second, because they're purely electrical, but brain tissue is much slower and can spend the time to do many steps. so, to put it a different way, if your brain was wired up like a computer, it would be so slow, as to be entirely unusable. it has to be wired up in a way that's more efficient, that allows for the slowness of brain tissues and neurotransmitters, and can still compute things at a level, at a human level, which is often blindingly fast. because of this, there has been a huge interest in massively parallel systems and complicated neural networks, which are wired up as we believe the brain does, and as such, we are helping computers to do things based on our understanding of the brain that they could never do before. the details of this is something we're going to talk about through the course. we're not actually going to end up explaining different capacities directly in terms of neurons, because we can't, and because we want it to have higher level explanation. so, when i talk about how people learn language, or how do they recognize faces, we're not going to talk much about neurons in particular, but we will talk about different brain areas and how they work. then the assumption is, the bet is, that everything we talk about in more functional ways, can ultimately reduce down to large networks of neural systems, and that in turn will ultimately reduce down to the specific behaviors of the specific neurons that we're looking at.
so, let's talk about the different parts of the brain and what they do. parts of the brain are functionalized for different purposes, they do different things. which is why damage to different parts of the brain has different effects. it's why when you look at an fmri scan or pet scan or some something that records neural activity, you could figure out based on the location of the activity what's going on. so, the first thing to realize is i'm talking about the brain, but i'd be more precise and more inclusive if i talked about the brain and parts of the spinal cord. so, you don't need your brain for everything. there're certain activities we do that can happen without a brain. like sucking in newborns or pulling your limb back to withdraw from pain or vomiting. but for everything else we talk about in this course, we'll really be talking about the brain. so, some of the structures of the brain that are highly relevant are called subcortical, which means they're below the cortex, which means they're in the center of the brain. this includes part of the brain like the medulla, which control certain automatic function like your heart rate, your blood pressure, swallowing, and so on. it includes the cerebellum, which is involved in body balance and muscle coordination. it contains about 30 billion neurons. so, this isn't small potatoes. the hypothalamus, which is involved in feeding and sex and thirst and different appetites. we're going to talk about emotions or visceral desires, we'll return to those parts of the brain. but for the aspects of psychology that are distinctive for us, that make us human, we're mostly focused on the outer layer, the cerebral cortex. so, the cerebral cortex it is all crumpled up. if you were to take a brain, pull out the cortex and straighten it out, like you're removing a rug you got from the trunk of your car and you have to straighten it out, it's about two feet square. so, it's lot of crumpling to get it in. it's about three millimeters thick. this is where the action is. this is where at least for the things i'm interested in, this is where it takes place. is where reasoning and language and complex perception comes from. fish don't have any cerebral cortex, reptiles and birds have a little bit, but primates, including humans, have a lot. when you look at the cortex, you'll see it has two halves. it has a left half and a right half. for each of these halves, when you look at it, you can demarcate the brain, the cortex into different lobes. there's going from your forehead and swooping to the back. you have the frontal lobe conveniently enough on the front. the parietal lobe, the occipital lobe, and the temporal lobe. each of these lobes, there's different things, which we'll talk about in a bit. another thing about the cortex though which is super interesting, is that it includes maps. what i mean by this is it includes topographical maps where two things that are close together in the brain are similarly close together in the body. so, there is a motor area where if you were to shock, parts of that brain, parts of the body would twitch accordingly. just like you'd expect, the middle finger is close to the thumb which is closer to elbow. if it's close in the real-world and your body it's close to the brain and there is a primary somatosensory area, which is the sense organs. there if you have somebody in the operating table and you shocked people, they would experience things, they might experience a sound or a flash of light or a touch. in fact, in the occipital lobe, you have a map for vision and in the temporal lobe, you have a map for sound. what's really cool is, i said the map is topographical, but the size of the brain areas don't correspond to the size of the actual body areas, but rather to the extent to which there's motor or sensory function. so, artists have drawn pictures of people if their body was proportioned to the extent that their brain was. you'd see the trunk of the body is relatively small, but their hands are enormous and the face is enormous because there's a whole lot of sensation. there is much more sensation going on in your hand than in your whole back even though the back is physically apart. so, part of the cortex is these projection areas. but less than a quarter of the cortex contains projection areas. as i said, the rest is involved with the cool stuff. with language, with reasoning, with moral thoughts, and so on. then the question comes in, how do we know this? how do we know what parts of the brain do what, what parts of the brain are involved, and why? there's different answers. so, one answer is we can scan the brain. we can use mri, which is a high frequency magnetic field, to look at the activity of the brain, what parts are active when people do different things. we can also look at so-called natural experiments when people have tumors or strokes or motorcycle accidents. in damaged part of your brain and we can ask the question, what damage to which parts of the brain correspond to damage to which functions? through these different methods, we've learned about the different parts of the brain and what they do. we could talk about some certain specific things that can go wrong due to brain damage or stroke or trauma. so, for instance, there's apraxia. apraxia is problems of actions. so, you're unable to do an action like waving goodbye or picking up before or can bring some food to your mouth. you're not paralyze. you can make the movements if you have to, but you can't coordinate these basic movements into complex actions. there's agnosia. agnosia is a disorders of perception. and they're not like you can't see, but you can't recognize. some is called psychic blindness. people of various forms of agnosia can describe a picture in terms of it's part, but can't recognize the objects that are being depicted. that's a form of visual agnosia there's also a specific prosopagnosia, where you can't recognize faces. oliver sacks wrote a wonderful book many years ago called the man who mistook his wife for a hat. this was a series of profiles of people who had surprising neurological disorders and the title case of the book was a man who actually had such an inability to recognize faces, he couldn't distinguishes his wife's face from that of a hat. milder forms of prosopagnosia, which some people suffer from and to be honest, i got a little bit of some terrible faces. is that you could recognize faces as faces, but you can't recognize whose face they are and it's very hard for you to recognize people. there's problems of sensory neglect. you get disorders that block out one part of the world. you might have damage to parts of your brain that would block out the left side of the world. it's not just the sort of physical thing, when you ask somebody with such a disorder to draw clock for instance, they'll put all the numbers from one to 12 on the right side of the clock. is as if they don't think of the left side of the world again. so, maybe it's not even a sensory problem, but an attentional problem. there's aphasia, which refers to disorders of language. some forms of aphasia are expressive like a broca's aphasia, where you can't really speak. a famous case of somebody who can only use the word tan, would say tan, tan, tan, but couldn't say anything else. or then there's something that's called receptive aphasia, where you can speak although what you say doesn't make much sense, but also you have a terrible time understanding other people. then there's all sorts of other disorders. there's the disorder which we talked about with regard to phineas gage and various forms of it. where damage to your brain, it's debatable whether this is true phineas gage, but there are other cases where it's much more clear. cause you to lose your moral sense, your sense of right and wrong, your ability to control yourself, to restrain yourself perhaps your conscience. now, we're going to talk about all of these things through the course but the moral here is that, a, there's some localization of function. there's some sense in which it correspond to different brain areas. b, again, this is an argument against dualism. we can see that in that anyone who argued that the mind isn't the brain would be hard-pressed to explain why damage to the brain seems to affect some very intimate and very important aspects of ourselves.
we've talked now about the parts of the brain, a little bit about what the different parts do, and let's end by talking about the brain as a whole. so, if you just look at the brain, if you remove it from somebody's head and put it on your table, it looks symmetrical, but it's actually not. so, this final topic is about what's called lateralization, which is about the difference between the two halves of the brain; the right half and the left half. it's long been known that there's a difference between right and left. we're not symmetrical creatures. most people are right-handed, meaning that they do a lot of their motor control and they are most fluid and capable like right hand writing with their right hand and as minority people are left-handed. and then, some people are evenly mixed, ambidextrous, right and left. people who are right-handed for the most part have language in the left half of their brain, and people who are left-handed are more evenly mixed. some people have in the right side of brain, others in the left side of the brain. so the cool thing is that, most functions of your brain are duplicated. so, a lot of times when you hear somebody say on the right side of the brain, the left side of their brain, and right brain and left brain, a lot of what people say about that is total nonsense. most of the functions of the brain are on both sides and to a large extent, it's sort of more of an issue of dominance or greater potential on one side to another than an absolute difference. but as sort of common wisdom goes, the left brain is more associated with a written language, and spoken language, with a reasoning, and logic, and science, and the right brain is more associated with insight, and imagination, and music. so, we have these two halves of the brain and normally they're in coordination, but they deal with the world in different ways. so, one thing worth noting in any discussion of the halves of the brain is that it works on a principle of contralateral organization, which is an awful technical term, but what it means is that your right brain sees the left side of the world, the left visual field, and the left brain sees the right side of the world. it just works out that the brain has this crossover effect where each half of the brain is looking towards the opposite half of the world. and similarly for motor control, your right hemisphere controls the left side of body, your left hemisphere controls the right side of the body. now, you might say, "well, this is ridiculous because i am one person and not two people. i can understand language and appreciate art. i see the world as a coherent scene. i don't see the world with half of me and see the other half of the world with the other half of me." but that's because the two halves of the brain are in constant immediate conversation. it's through the corpus callosum, and the corpus callosum is a network of neurons that connect one half of the brain with the other half. and this is what allows sensory information that's received on the left side of the brain for instance, to be perceived in the right side of the brain. it's what allows the left side of the brain to control the motor actions on the right side of the body because it could send instructions over to the right side of the brain to do it. in fact, you can see in some clever experiments the strange organization of the brain. so for instance, if you flash on the screen very quickly something on the right side of the body, you're quicker to name it than if it's flash on the left side of the body. why would that be? well, think about. if it's flash on the right side of the body, it's immediately perceived by the left hemisphere. the left hemispheres were spoken languages so you say, "oh it's a cup, it's an apple." if it's flash on the left side of the body, for a fraction of an instance delay, it has to crossover to the left side of the brain. and you'll never see this in everyday life, the time differences are just too small. but in a psychology lab, you can see this. now, what becomes really interesting is that for almost everybody, the two halves of the brain are in constant conversation, but not everybody. so, a while ago, people with severe epilepsy, they would cut the corpus callosum. epilepsy could be viewed as an electrical storm in the brain, the corpus callosum causes the brain to communicate from one half to another. so cutting the corpus callosum in some way, the idea would be to isolate and shrink the electrical storms. and so, people did work on. what they did is this very severe form of surgery and people with terrible cases of epilepsy. and the consequence which they didn't anticipate is all of a sudden you break one person off into two to some extent. you have a left side of the brain which does the talking and the right side of the brain which does a lot of other things, which appreciates music, and space, and so on. and the idea is that in some sense, you've taken a person and now you have two, one half of them who can speak and articulate their wishes, the other that can't. and making sense of this, what this means, what this does to a person leads to philosophical questions that fall outside the scope of this course.
we've talked a little bit about materialism. why psychologists believe and then some of the evidence for it, and then we've taken a quick tour of the brain, but the broader gist of things is what i want to return to and this is that the current view by psychologists, and neuroscientists, and other scientists bolstered by a lot of evidence is that dualism is wrong. the mind is the brain. there's not two substances, there is one, and i want to remind you how radical this is because i want people to worry about it. i worry about it and i want people to worry along with me. so, for instance, you might believe in spiritual beings and supernatural beings with consciousness but no bodies, like gods. if materialism is right, not only don't we have souls but maybe there's no such thing as souls, or to put it differently there's no such thing as mental life separate from the body. more to the point, maybe you were hoping that when your body dies, when you get very older, or you get hit by a bus, or whatever, you'll live on. you'll go to heaven. you'll go to a spirit world, or get reincarnated, or whatever, and psychologists and neuroscientists that they speak honestly would say, "that's crazy." you, your memories, your will, whatever makes you you is your physical brain and when your physical brain goes away so do you. so, people have to figure out what to make of it. what i want to close with though, since this all sounds not only disturbing but extremely arrogant, the idea that scientists are dictating the answer to the most deep questions of all, is i want to end with two notes of humility: the first is, the conception of the mind that fits very well with the materialist view i presented is that the mind is an information processor, it's a computer, and we treat the brain as the physical aspect of the hardware and our mental lives, the ideas, our processes, our heuristics, our algorithms as the software, as the programs that this hardware runs. this way of looking at things, i think works extremely well when it comes to activities like face recognition, language, motor control, logic and so on, but there still remains what the philosopher david chalmers has called the hard problem of consciousness. the feeling of what it is to slamming your hand in a car door, or eat scrambled eggs with hot sauce, or have an orgasm, or grieve for the death of your friend, or et cetera., et cetera., et cetera. these feelings, the feeling of what it's like, the qualia that many people believe can't be simulated on a computer, and many people wonder whether this could be truly the activity of the brain. if it's true, as i think it is true, that even these most qualitative experiences are the product of brain activities, i think we should admit that we don't exactly know how this happens. there's a quote by thomas huxley: "how is it that anything so remarkable as a state of consciousness comes about as a result of irritating nervous tissue. that question is just as unaccountable as the appearance of the genie when aladdin rubbed his lamp." huxley is saying it seems like magic. how a physical structure irritated by neurotransmitters swooshing back and forth and electrical signals running across neurons, how that gives rise to feelings is a mystery, it seems like magic, and i think he's right. i think we know that as the product of the brain, but to be honest we don't know how. the second bit of humility involves the fact that materialism poses a mechanistic conception of mental life, but a lot of us, both as scholars but also as people, are concerned with what you could call humanist values. values like the notion of moral responsibility: the idea we have free will, that the idea that we're responsible for our actions, the idea that there's such a thing in the world has intrinsic value, the idea that there's such a thing in the world perhaps as spiritual value. for some people it's very hard to reconcile this with the idea that we're merely brains, and there's two ways to react: one can simply reject humanist values, and i know philosophers and psychologists who confidently assert there's no such thing as free will, there's no such thing as morality, there's no such thing as anything higher or spiritual. i know many more people who reject the science, who say that, "look, if neuroscience is going to tell me that my decisions, my activities are nothing more than neural firings, then to hell with neuroscience." my own view is that these two things can be reconciled. i don't think it's easy, but i think that is possible to reconcile a mechanistic conception of human life with humanist values, and i'll return to this issue over and over again in the course, and in my final lecture i want to go back to it and try to present a little bit more detail what i mean and how this reconciliation can be defended.
i'd like to welcome people to the second lecture, who'll help me present the work of sigmund freud and the psychoanalytic theory that he founded. this will be followed by the third lecture where i'll talk about b.f. skinner and the behaviorist theory that he founded. what we're doing in this one and the next one is working on the foundations of psychology, exploring the grand theories that started the field off. one of the things that makes these theories interesting and sort of exceptional compared to contemporary work is that it really are grand theories. they have a great deal of scope. so, most of the work i'm going to be talking about throughout the course, most of the ideas and research are narrowed. they specific focus, specific domains they're looking at, so you might have a theory of prejudice. that's not going to be the same as a theory of language acquisition. your explanation for sexual attractiveness isn't going to be the same as your theory of schizophrenia. in contrast, the work of freud and work of skinner, which we'll talk about next week, are meant to encompass just about everything that matters. now, this isn't a history course. i'm not so much interested in wrong ideas from the past, but the reason to devote so much time to the scholars is that their ideas really do have a powerful influence about how we think about the mind right now. for better or worse, we live in a world profoundly affected by sigmund freud. his work has influenced how we think about every aspect of day to day life, how we think about the development of children, the causes and cures for mental illness, origins of religion, the nature of war, and everything you want to know but love, romance, and sex. he's had a profound influence on 20th and 21st century. and if there's one psychologist you ever heard of, it's going to be freud. freud does had a huge influence on contemporary culture, mostly for instance reflected in television shows where he shows up in star trek the next generation, bill and ted's excellent adventure, the seven percent solution where he meets sherlock holmes, and a dangerous method where he teams up with his most famous student carl young. freud was born in 1856. he spent most of his life in vienna, austria. he died in london soon after retreating there at the prior to the beginning of world war ii. he died in 1939. he's one of the most famous scholars ever, but he's not known for a single discovery. instead, he's known for the development of an encompassing theory of the mind. encompassing scientific theory of the mind developed over the span of many decades. he's a scholar of extraordinary energy and productivity, and was enormously well-known in his later life. they set a very interesting life. among many other tidbits about freud, he suffered from various addictions. for part of his life, he was a pretty serious cocaine addict and he found cigars irresistible and was perpetually smoking them, leading to is eventual suffering from cancer of the mouth.
what freud is almost universally acknowledged as a profoundly important intellectual figure. he's also the object of considerable dislike. this is in part because of his character. he was highly ambitious in the cause of promoting psychoanalysis, often dishonest, sometimes brutal to his enemies and sometimes particularly brutal to his friends and his students. more important that is the content of his views. at the time, he was seen as a sexual renegade out to destroy the conception of people as good and rational people. when the nazis rose to power in the 1930's, freud was seen as a jew who was attempting to single-handedly destroys some of the most cherished notions of christian morality. now, to some extent, many people see him this way, and to some extent this accusation has some truth to it. freud told us things about ourselves that are immensely uncomfortable and some things that many of us would rather not know. so, what did he say? well, if you ask someone who hates freud, they'll talk about the sillier stuff, and in fact freud said a lot of things and some of them were wacky at the time, and many of them certainly did not survive the verdict of scientific history. many of his ideas were simply silly. possibly the dumbest thing he ever said, which is something which many people think of him and associate with his name, is the idea of penis envy. so, penis envy is an account of a developmental progression. the idea is that at some point in her development, a little girl discovers that she doesn't have a penis. for her, this is a catastrophe because she infers, according to freud, that she was castrated. so, she turns to her father to get a penis substitute because he has a penis and rejects her mother who's equally unworthy, and freud calls this process the electra complex. now, if that's all you know about his work, if you think about freud in terms of penis envy, or phallic symbols, or kind of pop interpretation of dreams, you won't have the highest opinion of him. but at the root of freud's work is a set of ideas of immense importance and significance that are worth taking very seriously, and very broadly these are the ideas of unconscious motivation, that there're unconscious reasons for your feelings and actions as well as the notion of unconscious dynamics. that you are not one entity, you are many entities and the clash of these different systems inside your mind, inside your brain has all sorts of consequences leading among other things to dreams, to errors in speech, the sort of jokes you make and what you find funny, and often and in some cases to madness. now, certainly freud wasn't the first to believe in unconscious motivations, unconscious reasons, unconscious dynamics. you could find a lot of the same ideas in many scholars and elsewhere, like the plays of william shakespeare, but freud took it to an extreme and systematized it and turned it into science. the first idea, that our unconscious reasons, unconscious motivation, is a rejection of the common sense conception that we know what we're doing. so, suppose you fall in love with somebody and decide you wanted to marry that person, and suppose somebody was to ask you, "why?" you might say something like, "well, i'm ready to get married. it's time of my life. i really like the person. i want to make a life with that person, and so on," and maybe that's true, but a freudian would insist that your desires and motivations that govern your behavior, that you might simply not know about. you might want to marry john because he reminds you of your father, or you want to get back at your mother for betraying you, or some other such reason, and if somebody was to tell you this you would deny it, and you'd sincerely deny and say, 'no. that's not the reason." but this wouldn't deter a freudian. a freudian might argue that these processes, these motivations, these reasons are unconscious and they happen without your awareness. now, this idea that you don't know how your mind works, you don't have access to the systems that give rise to your experiences, and beliefs, and actions is something we accept for other psychological domains, like language comprehension, and visual perception, and we'll talk about those later on in the course, and we'll learn, talk about different theories of how we come to, say, understand language or see the world. they're going to propose all sorts of things that you have no awareness of, and you'll say, "okay. well, let's evaluate these theories on their merits." but it's downright scary to assume that this sort of unconscious, unknowing system operates to explain the most significant choices of your life. now, the marriage case is extreme, but there are a lot of simpler examples. have you ever liked someone or disliked them and not known why? you just find this either a sort of powerful attraction to a person or you find a person repellent, but if you had to articulate the reasons you couldn't really explain them. have you ever found yourself in a situation where you've asked, "what the hell am i doing here? why am i doing this? why did i get caught up in this?" and again not know the reasons. have you ever forgotten someone's name at exactly the wrong time? "yes, nice to meet you. this is my wife," and wondered later, "why did i forget that?" have you ever forgotten an appointment? and those cases actually, they're sort of an intuitive grounding for a freudian theory. have you ever forgotten an appointment that you really didn't want to go to? and rather than not go to it, you just slipped your mind somehow, and what this suggests is there's a lot more going on in our heads that we're aware of, and this is what freud called the unconscious. now, this might be okay if the unconscious was a reasonable rational computer planning for you and always doing the right things, but according to freud things aren't always so tidy. according to freud, there are three distinct processes going on in your head, and they're in violent internal conflict. these processes are the id, the ego and the super-ego. the id is present at birth. it's the animal part of ourself. it wants to eat, and drink, and poop, and pee, and get warm and get sensual pleasure. so outrageously stupid. it works in what freud call the pleasure principle. i want satisfaction and i want it now. the problem is the world doesn't work that way. one's desires, even as a baby, are rarely immediately satisfied. you could want milk but the mother's breast isn't there, and this failure of the world to give you what you want leads to a set of reactions, lead to a whole another system in the head called the ego, and the ego has some understanding of reality and logic. the ego works on the reality principle, which is it tries to pragmatically satisfy your desires or it suppresses them. but either way, it deals with the way the world is and how to reconcile that with what you want, and for freud your ego is you. your ego is your conscious self, and this is where consciousness emerges. it is, as you go through your day and think about things, and remember things, and plan, that's all your ego. now, if that's all there was, all there was was an id and an ego, it will be a simpler world, but then there's the super-ego, and the super-ego is the part of the mind that has internalized rules of parents and society. so, for instance, imagine a child who learns not to cheat in school, and one way to think about this is that the child learns that cheating, you get punished for it, you get caught, you get in trouble. that's a very ego thing. you may repress your desire to cheat because of worries about the consequences, but what really will happen is you come to internalize these moral rules and ultimately you believe you shouldn't cheat because it's wrong to cheat. you would feel guilty or ashamed if you cheated. in other words, it's not merely fear of consequences but rather you develop an understanding of what's right and wrong. so, the ego then serves two masters. it's stuck between raging animal desires on the one hand, the id, and a sort of moral conscience on other hand, the superego. now, it's tempting to think, as i'm framing it this way, that the id is dumb and animalistic and the super-ego is something advanced and civilized, but it's not so simple. a lot of the prohibitions set up in the super-ego were setup early in development, and are grounded on the prejudices and beliefs of the society in which you're raised, not necessarily an accurate moral understanding. so, for instance, it's very possible that you might believe, intellectually, that some act you engage in, some sort of sexual act for instance, is perfectly fine morally, but your super ego, which is developed in childhood, may scream at you. as irrational as it is, it might scream at you, "you should be ashamed. that's disgusting. that's filthy." so, part of what we do in our life, part of what we have to struggle with is the conflict between id and super-ego and to some extent your ego, yourself is stuck in the middle. you could see it as an iceberg, where a lot of it, it should be submerged and unconscious, but what we experience is mostly ego and a bit of super-ego. but a lot of what goes on into id, for freud, is unconscious, and so desires trickle up, but often you don't really know what you want. you don't know what's driving you, and this is particularly the case, as we'll see, if these drives, these desires are somehow forbidden.
so, as you can see, freud has a developmental theory, we started off as an id, develop an ego, and then develop a super-ego. but, for freud this was just the beginning and he has an elaborated theory that talks about the development of the mind, from birth to adulthood. focusing largely on sex and sexuality and psychosexual stages. there's a series of stages where you focus on different parts of the body through development. there are five main stages each associated with a different part of the body. what freud described as fixation, is that if you get into a problem at a certain stage, if you don't adequately resolve the problems posed by that stage you could end up stuck there, fixated there, and stay there as an adult. what this will mean is, that as an adult, you will try to achieve pleasure in ways that are equivalent in a way it's achieved in those stages. so, the first stage, running from about the first year of life is the oral stage, the mouth is associated with pleasure. there the problems that are posed might have to do with breastfeeding. for instance, weaning a child incorrectly, can lead to fixation for freud. fixation can lead to an oral focus, an oral fixation in adulthood. in the literal sense, that could mean somebody might eat too much or chew gum or smoke. in a more metaphorical sense, they could be dependent or needy. the next stage is the anal stage from roughly the first year to about age three. there, the anus is associated with pleasure and here, the key challenges involve toilet training. if toilet training isn't handled correctly, for freud it can lead to fixation and lead to problems. so, an adult who had struggles through this stage of development might be compulsive, clean, stingy, unwilling to part with his or her own feces, freud would say, metaphorically. in fact that this has ended up in language, so we might describe somebody saying, "oh, he's so anal", meaning he's so obsessively concerned and so clean and everything has to be right. then there's the phallic stage where the focus of pleasure shifts to the genitals. there, there are all sorts of challenges. for freud, fixation at this stage could lead to excessive masculinity in males and a need for attention or domination in females. for each boy, the key event that happens during this stage is what freud called the oedipus complex and this is based on the story of the king who killed his father and married his mother. the idea for freud is that analogous event happens for every boy in the course of his life. so, he's in the phallic stage and he seeks an external object of affection, he's going to focus on his penis and in some complicated and rather indirect sense. he wants to have a sexual object to have contact with and the obvious candidate here is his mother, who loves him and who he loves. but the problem is, there's also his father and so freud believed that a child wants his father to die, he comes to hate his father and wants his father out of the way. now, what's interesting for freud, is freud believed that a child was limited in his understanding of how thoughts work and believed that his thoughts are not private, but actually public. this is interesting in part, because there's a lot of developmental psychology research that we'll discuss later. exploring what children think about their minds and other people's minds and exploring the extent to which children understand, for instance, that thoughts really are private but we'll get to that later. but freud believed that his father, the child's father, would discover his plans and then in response will castrate him. so, children are terrified, boys are terrified of castration. so, the anxiety becomes unbearable and the child comes to give up on his plans to seduce his mother and kill his father and now, instead identifies with his father. then move to the latency period, where it's sort of all submerged and sexuality is repressed, there's not much sexuality. having made it through the whole oedipal event, the child focuses on hobbies and schools and friendship and it's only later on in puberty that it all comes raging back. at puberty, sexual feelings reemerge and healthy adults find pleasure in sexual relationships as well as other sort of pursuits. it's the fixated adults to adults who for some reason have problems with breastfeeding or toilet training or the proper separation from their parents. they get their energy tied up in earlier stages and they spend their lives trying to struggle with problems that they should have, if they were luckier, resolved during development. i'll also just note a lovely phrase, "love and work". it's not actually a quote from freud. i've been unable to find out exactly its origin. but the idea that the most important things in life are love and work. romantic and sexual and friendly pursuits combined with a rich fulfilling struggles to achieve things and interact with people and explore life, seems like a lovely phrase, and "love and work" seems to summarize a lot.
so, suppose you survive these developmental stages and you're now an adult, and you're not out of the woods yet, there are all sorts of challenges and problems you're faced with. one problem is that your id is sending up all sorts of desires, all sorts of weird sick stuff, sexual and violent, and these are forbidden by the super ego. it's not merely that you can't act upon them, so you shouldn't be thinking them, and so they get pushed down or repressed. you could even imagine a sort of a metaphor of you pushing down something, like some water spraying out from leaks on a floor and you're jamming towels over it or something like that. some of this repressed stuff, as in my fine metaphor, spills out, you can't contain everything. for freud, it spills out in jokes and slips of the tongue and in dreams. but also for freud, there are other ways to cope with these desires. there's other ways to repress them and these are what freud described as defense mechanisms. they defend the ego from this terrible stuff that's coming out from the id, and some of these you may be familiar with. we tend to use them in everyday language, another example of freud's influence. there's displacement, where you redirect shameful thoughts to more appropriate targets. you can imagine a boy who hates his father, and that's really unacceptable, you shouldn't hate your father. so instead, he bullies another kid or kicks the dog. he turns his anger and his hatred towards his father to a more appropriate and more acceptable target. so, there's sublimation. sublimation you take desires that are unacceptable and you displace them to more valuable activities. so for instance, somebody who has a strong sexual desires of forbiddens might devote a lot of energy to his or her work or studies. there's projection. projection is reducing anxiety by taking these impulses you have that you're ashamed of and attributing them to somebody else. so, imagine a woman with strong homosexual desires, and because of how she was raised, her super ego tells her these are unacceptable, they're inappropriate. so she becomes unconscious of them. but she comes to believe that there are other women are sexually drawn to her. or you may really dislike somebody you shouldn't dislike, and then come to a conclusion, "oh my gosh, this person must hate me." because your own shameful feelings are unacceptable, you will project them onto somebody else. there's rationalization, where you have certain anxiety-producing thoughts and you reason them away into more acceptable ways. so for instance, somebody might get pleasure, a father may get pleasure physically punishing his children. but nobody wants to think that of themselves. so the way he describes it to himself, the way he really believes it at the level of the self, the ego is that he's doing it for their own good. you know in general, a lot of the bad things we do, we rationalize. there's regression, and you see this in children where the idea is under certain forms of stress or stressful desires and stressful impulses from the id, you might retreat to a mode of behavior that's characteristic of an earlier stage. so you see this in some sense a child might suddenly act like a much younger child. finally, there's reaction formation which is cool and of unintuitive, where you replace threatening wishes and fantasies with their opposites. so you might express and finally say, "oh, i love this person. this person is my favorite person." as a way to mask the fact that you really don't love them at all, in fact, you hate them. now, these defense mechanisms proposed by freud are just everyday life, we have them all the time. but sometimes, we fail to properly repress the impulses from the id, and then you get into some real problems. you get what freud called hysteria. hysteria according to freud are these symptoms which showed up quite often in freud's time and maybe show up now only they're manifested in different ways, such as blindness and deafness without any physical cause, paralysis, tremblings, panic attacks, gaps of memory including amnesia and so on. for freud, these are nothing more than symptoms. they're ways in which we keep our impulses, our memories, our desires under lock and key. we keep forbidden stuff under lock and key. the simplest example, for instance, is you had this horrible event, something you did, something you saw and you just can't cope with it, so you forget it. you have a form of amnesia, where you black it out. freud believed that when these memories are recovered or when the impulses come to light, there's what he called catharsis, an explosive release, an emotional release of insight. so, then when you're treating these hysterical symptoms, you'd want to get to them through ways that could facilitate this catharsis, facilitate this understanding. freud originally tried to get at this through hypnosis, but later on moved to free association, which is a tool that sometimes used. the idea of free association is you give somebody a word and he says something back, but because it's so speeded, they don't have time to censor it. ideally, you get the true insight into what's working in their mind without the filtering powers that the ego and the super ego have. so, for instance, a fanciful example is, we're in a session and i say, "dog," and you say, "cat," and i say, "lunch," and you say, "sandwich," and i say, "mother," and you say, "sex." well, and then you're embarrassed. you offer resistance. you say, "oh, i didn't mean to say that." you don't go to your next appointment. you get angry at the therapist. this is part of the dance of psychoanalysis. freud used these methods and many others to explore inner conflicts, and what goes on in psychoanalysis and its success at reading people is a topic that we're going to get to at the very end of this course.
so this has been a summary of freud's theory focusing on the major aspects. but as i said earlier, the scope of his theory is considerable. you're allowed to say what dreams for instance, arguing that they were a form of wish fulfillment and he distinguished what he called the laden dream from the manifest dream. the dream as it really is from a dream as experienced and remembered, and talked a lot about the symbolism of dreams. so, dream interpretation is something which has had a very very long tradition but freud systematized it and to some extent adopted more of a scientific perspective on it. freud talked about myths in literature where he argued that often things like fairy tales expressed aspects of the unconscious and capture certain universal themes and he developed a theory of the origin of religion linking it to things like a desire for a father figure and broader aspects of humanity connecting it to his general theory of where civilization comes from. if you're interested in his works, it's a really rich body of ideas to explore. so, so far we've talked about what freud said, but now let's address the question, how much of it's true and how much of it is good science? because there's two ways to reject a theory, a theory could be wrong or could contain a lot of mistaken claims. so for instance, if you thought that the disorders of schizophrenia or autism were caused by bad parenting, well that's a theory. it's certainly mistaken, there's too much evidence against it. but another problem of a theory is that it could be too vague to test, it could just be story telling. one physicist famously derided the work of a colleague by saying," he's not right, he's not even wrong", and what scientists aspire to do is to at least be wrong, to have theories that are such specificity and testability that they could be proven mistaken. philosopher karl popper talked about this idea of the notion of falsifiability. so he pointed out that, what distinguishes science from non-science, is that scientific predictions make strong claims about the world and run the risk of being proven false. that is, he argued, you know you're dealing with a science when there are ways to prove its claims wrong. so, for instance suppose we were to make claims like this; damage to the part of the brain known as the hippocampus causes failures of implicit memory but not explicit memory. or, everywhere in the world men should prefer on average, they have more sexual partners than women prefer. or, exposure to violent television makes children more violent or, ingestion of certain drugs makes the symptoms of schizophrenia go away, are these true or false? well each and every one of these claims we'll discuss later on in the course and i'll also explain to you what implicit memory and explicit memory are. but the point here is, these are the sorts of things that can be proven false. this is the stuff of science, these are interesting and substantive claims. i think very few philosophers today would agree with popper's claim that, falsifiability is the absolute criteria through which you can distinguish science from non-science. but what they would agree with is that if the claim is too vague to be proven false or too slippery to be proven false, then you may not be dealing with a scientific theory in the first place. so i'm a capricorn and here's a horoscope for my day, your energy is focused on work today maybe a bit too much so it's a good time to get a lot done for sure but try to make sure that your relationships don't suffer as a result. the problem with this horoscope isn't that it's wrong, it's that it's so vague it can't be wrong depending on what you mean by work. there's always going to be something to be said for your energies focused too much on work, and advice is so banal and empty that there's nothing that can happen or you could say."oh that was bad advice i shouldn't have done that." i kind of prefer the horoscopes i got from the satirical magazine, the onion "there's no worse fate than dying alone. thankfully you'll be surrounded by hundreds of airline passengers when it happens." and part of the humor of this, besides this unremitting grimness and honesty, is that it's specific. it's a specific horoscope and you never see that, and this is of course the sort of thing which could be wrong. if a scientist told me they had a theory of future behavior and they predicted how people go on a diet and then they were right, i'd say that's credible science. so take this back to freud, one of the main accusations of freudian theory is that it's unfalsifiable. it's based a lot on anecdotes, on descriptions of clinical events and in fact the therapeutic environment itself has a sort of unfalsifiability to it. so imagine dealing with a therapist and your therapist, suppose you're lucky enough to be treated by freud himself says you hate your mother and if the patient says "oh wow what an insight that's true" the therapist will say," well i'm right, this supports me". but suppose the therapists of those freud said you hate your mother and the patient is outraged "no i don't. that's horrible." freud could say,"well, your anger shows this idea is painful for you, you have repressed it from consciousness. i am right", and when dealing with somebody who has a freudian explanation, here's the ultimate cause of your problems or of your anxiety. harder the problem is, it's not clear what could ever prove that explanation wrong. if you can't prove it wrong, it's not science and more to the point, it's not very interesting. now to be fair, a lot of freudian's and a lot of the scholars who have followed and been influenced by freud's ideas have tried to take his ideas and turn them into empirical falsifiable claims, and if you think about a lot of what we talked about in this lecture, it does admit of testing. so for instance, if freud's right, your experience of breastfeeding should be a reliable predictor of your personality later on in life. if freud is right, your experience of toilet training should be a reliable predictor of your experience later in life. if freud is right, whether or not you're raised by one parent or two, whether or not you're raised by a man and woman or two men, two women should have a profound effect on the electra complex, the oedipus complex and so on. freud made specific claims about the origin of sexual preference and he certainly made a lot of claims about success of psychoanalysis. so to some extent a lot of freudian's would say, " the proof is in the pudding, psychoanalysis rests on a freudian analysis of what's going on", and so if the freudian analysis is correct you would expect this method of treatment to be uniquely powerful in curing people's problems. unfortunately most people believe that it isn't.
although psychoanalysis has some fans and somebody would argued that it is useful in certain ways. it really is no longer a preferred treatment for psychological problems and more generally, very few of the specific freudian claims about toilet training for instance have proven correct. this is why departments in universities and research laboratories, freudian ideas are just not talked about that much. somebody will come to see me at yale and they'd say, "what kind of courses on freud do you offer?", and i'll tell them the truth, which is we don't offer any. in a university, freud is discussed more in an english department than a psychology department. his ideas, his specific claims are just not thought to be either scientific enough or true enough to admit of careful study and focus. for a psychology student taking the psychology major at yale, this is probably all freud they're ever going to hear. so, freudian theory isn't taken that seriously within contemporary psychological research. why do we spend so much time talking a little? one of a few reasons. first, freud has had an extraordinary influence. he's had an extraordinary influence on psychology particularly clinical psychology, and when we turn to talk in the next lecture about skinner and behaviorism, we can best understand that research tradition as a reaction at least in part to freud. more than that, freud has had a tremendous influence about how all of us psychologists and non-psychologists think about the mind. a second reason is that although most of freudian ideas are not taken seriously, freud had a lot to say. i think freud was a brilliant, and important, and very perceptive scholar, and even if we reject most of his ideas, it may well be that a few of them have staying power. for instance, freud's ideas about dreams have a go bag, scholars will disagree quite a bit over the extent to which dreams mean things, but many scientists believe that the idea that dreams captures, i'm sorry hidden meaning. again, an old idea but something that freud made a lot of, has quite a bit of merit. other neuroscientists try to relate freud's constructs of the id, the ego, and the super-ego to specific parts of the brain. i don't think you can go wrong. reading freud with an idea towards cynically, and carefully, and analytically asking, "okay. a lot of this is bogus." but some of it might be valuable and we should look carefully to see what parts of it we want to keep. most of all, the grand idea of freud, the idea of a dynamic unconscious is intact. in fact, in the lectures that follow, we will discuss all sorts of aspects of the mind; language, and prejudice, and development, and emotions. it's going to be a continuing theme how much of what we're talking about, how much that's really of interest lies inaccessible to the conscious mind but actually beneath the surface.
so, last class, we discussed freud. now i want to turn to who's probably the second most famous psychologist ever, b.f. skinner. now, there's an important difference between these two scholars. freud invented psychoanalysis pretty much from scratch. but for skinner, the situation was a bit different. the ideas were already there, by scholars like john watson. skinner came late into the field, but what he did was he package these ideas. he expanded upon them and he presented them as an articulated theory, the theory of behaviorism, to both the scientific community and the popular community. and just as freud became a major figure when he was alive and after that, so too did skinner. in 1960s and 1970s, he dominated american intellectual life with his radical and very, very interesting theory. so, behaviorism has three main claims. the first is an emphasis on learning, a strong rejection of innate ideas or innate traits. for skinner, everything you know, everything you are is the result of your experience. so, there is no human nature. we are infinitely malleable. prior to skinner, this idea was nicely summed up by john watson, who said, "give me a dozen healthy infants, well-formed, and my own specified world to bring them up in and i'll guarantee to take any one at random, train them to become any specialist i may select--doctor, lawyer, artist, merchant-chief, and, yes, even beggarman and thief, regardless of his talents, pensions, tendencies, abilities, vocations, and race of his ancestors." now, you could see the appeal of this view, in some way and in a very traditional centers, very liberal view, because it says that you could be anything. particularly, as watson was explicit to point out, your race, and you might say now, your gender, doesn't matter. it's just your environment. any one of us has infinite possibilities. a second theme of behaviorism is what you call anti-metalism. so, behaviorist were very insistent on doing science. to a large extent, you could see behaviorism as the backlash against the excesses of freud. so, freud positive, all sorts of crazy invisible things. defense mechanisms, and the id, and the super-ego, and the oedipus complex, incredibly complex things that are internal to the head and are only revealed an exceedingly direct ways. the behaviorist said, "we want to do real science, and to do real science, we have to get away from these unscientific things like freud talked about." even unscientific things like, for behaviorist, desires, and wishes, and goals, and beliefs, and emotions, and stick to things we can observe, like stimulus, responses, feature of the environment, and so on. only then can we become a true science. the third idea of behaviorism is that there's no interesting differences across species. now, maybe a behaviors would concede a rat can't learn quite as quickly as a human. a pigeon is somewhat different than its learning capacities than a child. but for the most part, the principles of learning, and this is what i'm going to talk about next, the principles of learning proposed by a behaviorist are whole across all species. so, in essence, the only difference between a person and a rat in what they could come to know lies in the situations in which they are raised. as you can imagine, this is a radical, and shocking, and very interesting view.
so, for the behaviorist, there are three main learning mechanisms that are intended to explain everything we come to know about the world and the first i could describe pretty easily,, it's called habituation. a behaviorist might define habituation as a declining tendency to respond to stimuli that are familiar due to repeated exposure. that's just a fancy way of saying that, we get used to things, we might react strongly to something that we experienced for the first time, but if we experienced over and over again, we'll react less strongly. so, we become used to the ticking of a clock, or traffic noise, or trains. if in the middle of my lecture i was suddenly go boo, you might startle. but, if i go boo, and then did it again and again, they won't bother you anymore. you become used to it. this turns out to be an incredibly useful psychological mechanism, because what it does is, it keeps us focused on novelty. something that's been in an environment for awhile, shouldn't capture our attention as much. we've already registered it, we've already thought of it. but, something that is new could be important, and could be dangerous, and so it was worth attending to. when i was a teenager, i worked in a sheet metal factory for a long period and it was incredibly noisy, and sparks flying, and machines moving, and at the beginning, all of these captured my attention, but pretty quickly i grew to become used to it. but, if something new happened, the new noise, or a machine moving in a different way, it would capture my attention and it should. because it suggests that something different is going on. similarly for any of us dealing with our environments, something new should capture attention, something old less so, because we already know about it. it turns out habituation isn't extremely important learning mechanism. without it, i'm not sure how we could survive in the world. we're going to discuss it in the next lecture on developmental psychology in somewhat of a different way, looking at its role in experiments that psychologists have invented to explore the minds of children and even babies.
the second learning mechanism is known as classical conditioning, and a behaviorists would describe this as the learning of an association between one stimulus and another stimulus. this mechanism can best be illustrated through a famous experiment by the nobel prize winning physiologist ivan pavlov. pavlov won his nobel prize for studies on the physiology of digestion, and to explore this, he needed to collect saliva from dogs and an apparatus for doing so. but he came to notice that of course the dog would produce saliva in response to the food, that was expected. but he observed that the dog would also start to produce saliva when a person carrying the food walked into the room and when the dog saw the dish. later on, to explore this, pavlov would ring a bell and then get the dog the food. after repeated pairings of this sort bell, food, bell, food, bell, food, the dog will start to salivate at the sound of the bell. this is really cool. i mean, we can talk about the details and what this experiment means, but it's a wonderful example of scientific serendipity of chance, how a scientist looking at one thing can discover another and be smart enough and clever enough to notice wow there's something really interesting going on. it's one of a million reasons why science is incredibly cool. so, here's the logic of classical conditioning, along with the vocabulary people use to describe it. you start off with a neutral stimulus. in the case of pavlov's experiment, it's a bell. so the bell evokes no responses, it's neutral. the dog hears the bell and goes whatever. you also have an unconditioned stimulus and unconditioned response. in this case, it's the food and the saliva. the idea is that prior to the learning, this already exists, either it's innate, it's builtin, or it's been learned in the past. but regardless, the dog starts off with a saliva response to the food. so, you have two sorts of things. you have the bell, a neutral stimulus that gives rise to no response, and the food, an unconditioned stimulus which gives rise to an unconditioned response. then you have conditioning, our learning. in conditioning, what you do is you put together the bell and the food. you put together neutral stimulus and the unconditioned stimulus. the unconditioned stimulus will give rise to unconditioned response and a neutral stimulus will be paired with the unconditioned stimulus. the cool thing about this is that over time, if you have these repeated trials going together, soon, the bell will go from being a neutral stimulus to being conditioned stimulus and give rise to the conditioned response. so, imagine you go to a dentist's office and it's your first trip to a dentist's office, and when the drill hits your teeth, it's painful and you flinch. also, the drill makes a sound, a whine. now, originally, this whine is a neutral stimulus like the bell to the dog. you here the whine, you go 'whatever'. no response at all. well, the pressure of the drill against your teeth is an unconditioned stimulus giving rise to an unconditioned response of flinching or pulling back or pain or whatever. conditioning then will happen because whenever the dentist presses drill against your teeth in a painful way, you hear the sound of whine of the drill. through the magic of classical conditioning, what will happen over time is that as soon as you hear the whine of the drill even if it is not against your teeth, you'll flinch and drawback. so, the logic of classical conditioning is that repeated pairings of a neutral stimulus and unconditioned stimulus transforms a neutral stimulus into a conditioned stimulus, giving rise to a conditioned response. behaviorist talk about reinforced trials. a reinforced trials are trials when the conditioned stimulus and unconditioned stimulus are brought together. the bell and the food, the whine of the drill and the drill itself, and this increases the connection. this is how learning takes place. there is also unreinforced trials. an unreinforced trials when the conditioned stimulus happens without the unconditioned stimulus, and this decreases the connection of learning. gradually, the connection goes away. imagine you were to ding the bell at pavlov's dog but not providing food so dog would produce saliva, then you do it again and again and again and again. over time, the dog will produce less and less saliva. if you would here the whine of the drill but experienced no pain over and over again, you gradually come to respond to it less. the idea is that the world changes. you imagine two things that are connected, you should produce the same response. but they could become unconnected, and you should also be flexible enough to learn not to produce the same response, and this is what's called extinction. so, classical conditioning has considerable range of application. you can use the methods of classical conditioning to teach things to all sorts of animals, not just dogs, and cats, and chimps, and horses, and so on, but even animals like crabs, and fish, and cockroaches. just about any creature can learn the relationship between two different types of stimulus. so, stimulus that originally didn't evoke any response, like a sound or a flash of light, can come to evoke a sort of reaction. when it comes to people, classical conditioning has been argued to play a role in all sorts of things. so, for instance, you could imagine playing a role in the acquisition of phobias, something that originally had no import. you weren't afraid of it at all, like say a dog. you could become afraid of it if it became associate of a painful experience. you could imagine along the lines is something like clockwork orange, the movie in which our main character is tortured, and in the midst of his tortures, he hears classical music, and the classical music becomes associated of his suffering. so soon, classical music becomes incredibly aversive to him. on a brighter side, classical conditioning is the logic underlying some treatments of phobias. so, imagine you are afraid of snakes, you're deathly afraid of snakes so much so that it is messing up your life, well, one sort of treatment would be, and this is known as a systematic desensitizations, is exposed you to pictures of snakes or images of snakes in kind of a safe way while pairing these with relaxation techniques, or in some cases, just drugs they gave you to relax. as a result of this, over time through classical conditioning, these stimuli come to evoke the same response of relaxation that the drug has or the relaxation technique has. so, stimuli that were originally aversive can come to have different connotations. one can see classical conditioning to a hunger reaction, so we're not pavlov's dog. but in some way, we are in that certain times of day or certain experiences evoke hunger, not because they are intrinsically the sort of things that evoke hunger, but because they become associated with hunger. if you walk past a favorite restaurant or a tv commercial, it's showing images of things like food wrappers or things that are associated with favorite foods you have can make you hungry or take various addictions. you may discover you have a craving for a cigarette or a drink or some heroin right when you put into a situation, which is typically associated with cigarettes or alcohol or heroin. through classical conditioning, our appetites can be evoked in strange ways. this has been taken by some to provide their lines of a theory of fetishes, where people are sexually aroused by things like footwear, and you could imagine a story where you are achieving sexual satisfaction through a conventional way, and also in your eyes fall upon a pair of shoes. these two things become associated through the magic of classical conditioning, where say to pleasure of orgasm gets associated with those shoes, and now shoes become a conditioned stimulus evoking into conditioned response of sexual interest. now, that's a crazy theory. i mean, for one thing, it doesn't explain why some things like shoes are the target of fetishes and sexual interest while other things that you might look at during sex like clocks or ceiling fans or pillows don't become the object for sexual fetishes. for another thing, for something to become learned through classical conditioning, you need repeated exposure, and it's hard to imagine how that's going to happen. but nonetheless, people have argued that classical conditioning has some role in sexual delight and sexual satisfaction. in fact, one treatment for pedophiles, controversial, but one treatment for pedophiles would be training them to have control fantasies during masturbation, to shift the association of sexual pleasure away from they dominance and violence in children to more appropriate and more moral sorts of interactions. so, what is classical conditioning? i have described how it happens and the phenomena, but what goes on in it? the idea is it's an adaptive mechanism that gives you sensitivity to cues that an event that is about to happen, and the purpose of the sensitivity is that it allows you to prepare for that event. so, what's really going on in classical conditioning is we're sensitive to cues to something to allow us to prepare for that something. this elegantly explains two very interesting things. one is, what's the optimal timing between the conditioned stimulus and the unconditioned stimulus? say the conditioned stimulus would be the bell and unconditioned stimulus would be the food, or the conditioned stimulus would be the drill and unconditioned stimulus would be the pain and by drilling and the sound of the drilling, that sound. it turns out it's actually not best when they're simultaneous, rather we learned the connection best when the conditioned stimulus comes immediately before the unconditioned stimulus. this makes sense if you think that neurological system underlying classical conditioning is built so that you can prepare and anticipate. moreover, the conditioned response is often preparation for the unconditioned stimulus. so, consider why would a dog fill his mouth with saliva when it hears the bell? well, that's what you do when you are about to get food. why would you flinch when you hear the whine of the drill? well, because that's what you do when you are about to get poked. so, classical conditioning is in some way a mechanism of preparation and an adaptive and clever interesting way for the mind to have evolved to deal with the world and how to cope best with it.
the third and final learning mechanism that we'll discuss is instrumental conditioning, also known as operant conditioning. this is learning the relationship between actions and rewards and punishment. it's for learning what works and what doesn't. it's learning which of your actions lead to positive results and which don't. so, this is very different from classical conditioning. classical conditioning is passive. you just sit there and you observe how stimuli interact, you respond to them, and as a result of the co-occurrence of say the bell and the food, you come to learn things. instrumental conditioning or operant conditioning is based on your own actions. you act to the world, and then the way the world treats your actions shapes the nature of your future actions. skinner, although he did not devise the idea of instrumental conditioning, built on it. this was his major theoretical and experimental research program was focusing on the extent to which operant conditioning could shape the behavior of humans and of other animals. so, the theoretical foundations for operant conditioning were established by the psychologist, edward thorndike. thorndike noticed in his studies of animals, that animals don't seem to learn through sudden insight, but rather through a series of random activities that they get better and better at. his example was putting a cat in a puzzle box. in this video here explains what thorndike did. but how is a new skill learned? that was a question which began to fascinate thorndike. to answer it, he built some ingenious puzzle boxes from which cats could only escape by operating latches. and in you go. the cat appears to be very clever in engineering its escape. solving the problem with the deftly placed paw and a push of its nose. but thorndike didn't believe that an animal, even a clever cat understands the consequences of its behavior. when he placed a cat in the puzzle box for the first time, thorndike was unable to see any evidence of flashes of insight. the successful actions appeared first by chance. he proved that the apparent cleverness arose by trial and error, and use graphs to measure the rate of learning. a well-practiced cat quickly recalls the actions that help it escape to its reward of food. if an action brings a reward, thorndike believed that that action becomes stamped into the mind. in his thesis, he explained further his ideas about learning, that behavior changes because of its consequences. he called this his law of effect. which explained how even wild creatures develop new habits. the cat eventually comes to escape from the puzzle box, but not through figuring it out, thorndike argued, but rather a cat does all sorts of different activities. in the end, just one of them, in this case pulling the lever, is reinforced gifts the cat the payoff that it wants. thorndike summarized what was going on here, as the law of effect. the tendency to perform an action is increased if rewarded, weakened if not. the law of effect leads animals gradually to come to the correct behavior in certain situations. now, as i said, skinner famously extended the principles of operant conditioning, and he developed it. so, let me work through with some examples. suppose you have to train a pig. well, how would you train a pig? what you would do is, you would reinforce it. there's two types of reinforcement, there's positive reinforcement, giving it something it wants, and negative reinforcement, releasing it from something aversive. so, for instance, if the pig, i don't know, had a heavy object on and is very painful, you could reward it by taking away that pain, by removing the objects. negative reinforcement and positive reinforcement are two sorts of reinforcement, they're the sorts of things you do to an animal to increase the likelihood of its behavior in the future, and punishment is a way to decrease the animals likelihood of doing that behavior in the future. so, how can you use this to train the pig? well, if the pig is doing something you want it to do you could reinforce it, you could reward it, and if it's doing something you don't want it to do, you could punish it. but that's really limited because suppose you wanted to make the pig do something it's never done before, like dance, well you can't just wait for it to dance and then reinforce it. it will never do that. so, what you do is what skinner described as shaping. for instance, when the pig moves in a certain way that approximates dancing, you reward it, and now it'll start to do that. then when it moves in that way and another way and it's looking even more like dancing, you reward it again. in other words, as the pig gradually approximate the behavior you hope it to do, you reward it on its way. skinner viewed it as a shaping and he often described as analogous to natural selection. so, it's not like all of a sudden animals evolve an eye, and then that leads to increased survival and reproduction, that'll be magic. the way eyes evolve is, animals evolve something that very roughly approximates, something approximating something like an eye, which leads to increased survival and reproduction. then you have step by step by step by step until they evolve complex structures. skinner argued, the same thing happens with complex behaviors. so, he proved it. you could use the techniques of shaping to train animals to do all sorts of things. you could train pigeons to play ping-pong, for example, or take children. suppose you want your child, your young toddler to go to your fridge and bring you back a beer, well, you're not going to wait for the kid to do it spontaneously and then say, "good job." but rather, the child walks to the kitchen, you say, "that's great. you did great walking into the kitchen." then ultimately gets good at that, and goes to the fridge, "that's terrific." gradually, by rewarding each and every step, you can get the child to come to act upon the behavior, how you wanted to. certainly people who train animals use the techniques of shaping all the time. they reward approximations of the behavior until ultimately, behavior is what they're looking for. now, an example so far, the reinforcements and punishments were instinctively reinforcing or punishing. things like food or shock. but in reality, you don't need to do that. you can reinforce and punish in all sorts of ways, even for animals, that don't correspond to things that are built in reinforce or punishments. a dog will be rewarded by a pat on the head or saying, "good dog." of course, humans will work for money, strips of paper, that themselves have no reinforcing properties. you could train animals to work for things like poker chips. so, how could this happen? well, the way this works is, you combine operant conditioning and classical conditioning. that is, you use classical conditioning to take something which is a neutral thing, like a poker chip. you associate it with a positive unconditioned stimulus. pretty soon, the poker chip, through classical conditioning, will tend to have reward and qualities. so, for instance, if every time you give your dog a delicious treat, you pat him on the head. pretty soon, patting it on the head will become rewarding to the dog. use classical conditioning to make a pat on the head rewarding. now, when you do your operant conditioning, you could use something like your pat on the head as a reward. another way in which we can elaborate on this scenario training a pig, is to think about schedules of reinforcement. so the simplest case is, every time the pig does something right, you reward it. but real life doesn't work that way, and real learning doesn't work that way. there's all sorts of partial reinforcement in the world, in which case we get reinforced some of the time, and not all of the time. you could imagine this in terms of a fixed versus variable and ratio versus interval schedules of reinforcement. what this means is, a fixed ratio reinforcement is a reward after every such and so responses. so imagine a piecework, which is every 100 objects you put together, you get a reward. in fact, you can train pigeons to do different activities where you don't reward them every time, you just reward them every nth time, where n could be, for a pigeon, like even hundreds. there's variable ratio reinforcement which is on average once every n times. this is how a slot machine works. so, a slot machine doesn't give out money every 100 times because then people would get rich off of it. but roughly, gives out some amount of money, say every 100 times. sometimes it's right away, sometimes after 500, but it's roughly. there's a fixed interval reinforcement. so, i checked my email, and every once in awhile i get a positive email, and that can be fixed in some crazy world, where every hour i get a positive email, but more likely it's variable. every once in a while, i get a positive email. so, who cares? why would you want to do scheduled reinforcement that were partial, that weren't right away? well, the answer is, the partial reinforcement effect. the idea is that if you stop reinforcing something, the behavior goes away. if you reward your dog with a pat on the head or a treat every time it does something, and then you stop doing so, it'll stop giving the activity you're looking for. but, suppose you train it by reinforcing it every time, if so, then when you stop reinforcing it, it's behavior will go away pretty quickly. but, if you reinforce it partially, its behavior will stick around for a long time. so, imagine a kid who has tantrums. suppose you reward the kid every time he has a tantrum. so you get much, "okay, i'll give you a treat, i'll give you a present, whatever." then you stop doing it. well, the kid will come to realize my tantrums aren't working anymore, and gradually will come to stop. but suppose instead, as parents often do, we reward the kid not every time it has a tantrum, but roughly every 10 times. "oh fine, i can't take it anymore, here's something." well now if you start rewarding the kid, the tantrums will last a very long time. it's as if, and this isn't the way behavior would like to think about it, but it's as if, when you reinforce somebody every time, they think, "okay, i could tell this gets an immediate response, " and then when you stop reinforcing, they say, "it's over. this isn't working anymore." but if you reinforced them occasionally, one out of every 100 times, or once at a roughly couple of hours, then when you stop reinforcing them, they say, "well, i'm not getting reinforced anymore, but maybe this is more to partial stuff. maybe my reinforcement is just around the corner." in fact, the kid doing tantrums might say to you, "i'm going keep doing tantrums because sure you're not rewarding me now, but eventually you'll reward me." maybe it's not so interesting that animals like chimpanzees and dogs understand this and that kids understand this, but interestingly, even rats and pigeons seem to understand this. if you want to make a behavior last, don't reinforce it every time, reinforce it intermittently. so, we've reviewed three general learning mechanisms. we talked about habituation, classical conditioning, and operant conditioning. these are argued to be a theory of how animals come to behave the way they do and humans, as well as techniques for training animals and training humans. so, skinner famously argued, that a good society would use the techniques of behaviorism to make people better. so, for instance, instead of thinking about abstract, moral principles regarding justice and retribution and so on, if we want to stop crime and encourage generosity and kindness, our societies should figure out ways to reinforce good behaviors, and punish bad ones. behaviorism became an extremely popular and promising idea to shape the world to make it a better place.
so as i said, beyond the specificness of the learning mechanisms, behaviorists believe three main things. the first is that there's no innate knowledge. these three mechanisms are all an animal would need. the second is anti-mentalism. you would explain mental life without mental stuff like desires and goals, but just through principles that linked up stimulus and response. and the third is that these learning mechanisms will work for any stimulus and any response. and for any animal, the way humans learn is no different in principle from how rats learn, and how monkeys learn, and how pigeons learn. i think it's fair to say that nobody believes this anymore. just about everybody agrees to at least some extent that these three claims are mistaken. first, there's a lot of evidence for unlearned knowledge. we'll see in subsequent lectures that was evidence for an eight contribution to capacities like learning language, perceiving a physical world, understanding number, certain aspects of sexual preference, and so on. furthermore, even when it comes to learning, which is the focus of behaviorism, it turns out different animals have different learning mechanisms. the way birds learn birds song seems quite different from the way that humans learn language. the way some animals learn to navigate is just different from the way other animals learn to do this. the way some animals form attachments or develop cooperative behavior is often special to that sort of species of animal. and none of this is that surprising, natural selection will take different creatures on different paths. as for the sort of middle proposal that is unscientific to talk about observables. in some way, this is an understandable reaction to freud. who made all sorts of dramatic claims that were, as we said, unfalsifiable and difficult to pin down and horribly vague. but the truth is that all sciences talk about an observables. biologist talked about genes even before we even knew what one looked like. physicists will talk about string theory. and certainly for psychology, when explaining a complex and intelligent mechanism, it makes sense to appeal to internal representation. suppose to had to ask how a complex chess machine worked. you would say, well, it has this sort of rule built into it, it has this sort of strategy, and so on. you would appeal to the internal workings in a machine and you'd be right to do so, because things like computers have internal workings that can only be explained in terms of things like models of the board, and rules, and strategies, and so on. similarly, humans, there's something going on inside our head. one of the objections to behavior is that it's crazy to deny that we think even if we don't move. that we have dreams, that we have fantasies, that we deliberate over things, and a behaviorist might say that's fine, but that's not scientific. but it turns out that to explain even the most basic of human behaviors, you need to appeal to these internal representations, and true as well for animals. so it turns out that animals, for instance, get better and better at learning something, understanding something, even without reinforcement and punishment. and there is a rich literature developed by the psychologist tolman, on what's called latent learning, which is learning without any sort of feedback. and this is all sort of common sense. you could imagine yourself looking over a map or making your way through a house, and coming to understand the spacial arrangement without any sort of reinforcement. the idea that reinforcement, at least in any sort of specific concrete sense, is not plausible. and here's a nice illustration of an experiment that shows how animals might really do in an interesting sense, have maps in their head. [music] >> this maze is designed to test whether rats can invent a new route in their heads. most of the possible routes to the food are blocked off. [music] there is only one route to run down, and the rat appears to find its way to the food by trial and error, the same way pippin learned to pick up the suitcase. [music] but it also appears to re-check the layout before using the route its learned. [music] now comes the crucial part, the learned route is blocked off and new ones are opened. can the rat use a mental map to think out a new route to the food? [music] yes, and he does it the very first time. the maze demonstrates that laboratory rats are capable of more than trial and error learning. >> but let's step back to a broader question. does behaviors in general provide good explanations for human action? and skinner made the case for it in his classic and quite wonderful book, verbal behavior. but verbal behavior was subject to a book review by the linguist and public intellectual noam chomsky. and this book review became actually the most, i think, important book review in human intellectual history. i think it's fair to say that chomsky's critiques in this book review shattered the foundations of behaviorism. now in the course of chomsky's review, it's not like he brought up scientific evidence and scientific arguments against skinner's claim. ultimately chomsky championed a certain view on language development that was very nativist and very opposed to skinner. but this isn't what he talked about in his review. in his review, he analyzed skinner's claims in their own right. in particular, his claim that human behavior is shaped by reinforcement and punishment. what he ended up arguing is, that at least when it comes to people, let's put aside animals, his focus wasn't animals. at least when it comes to people, these notions are either flat wrong or so vague as to be unfalsifiable and uninteresting. so chomsky points out for instance that skinner raises questions like why do people talk to ourselves or why do we imitate things sometimes or create art? give bad news to enemy or fantasize without pleasant situations. these are all good questions. and what skinner says is for each of these, it's reinforcement. we do this because it's reinforcing. and chomsky's point is this. it's either false or empty. it's not literally true that these things are reinforcing. in a sense that you get some sort of food, or pat on the head, or gift, or something that gives you pleasure as soon as you do it. when i talk to myself, i don't get any prize for it, i just like talking to myself sometimes. when i fantasize, the fantasy itself is its own reward, but there's no reinforcement. now, what skinner could say is that you do get reinforcement, it's just more abstract, it's rewarding, and that's the reinforcement. but chomsky's point here is, when you make reinforcement so abstract, you lose any explanatory power. you just say we like it because we like it. so if skinner is forced to say, as chomsky argues he does, that creating art is reinforcing because we like creating art, that just comes down to the claim we create art because we like creating art, which is true, but psychologically uninteresting. and so it may well be that skinner's theory of punishment and reinforcement, when made really explicit, in a way we did when we talked about training a pig or something, is a wonderful explanation of animal learning and the training of animals. but it seems to fall short when explaining why humans do what we do. and you can see this in other ways as well. so move beyond the chomsky critique. it's not actually true in some sense that our behaviors are the product of law of effect. because sometimes, we actually come to insights. if i was stuck in the puzzle box, i wouldn't flail away and do 100 things. rather, i would think about it. i'd model it in my head, figure out what works and act upon it. so where does this leave us? well the legacy of behaviorism seems to be this. it has given us a richer understanding of some very important learning mechanisms. there may be much more in our head, there may be innate knowledge, there may be insight, but i can't imagine anybody doubting that we have the capacity for habituation, classical conditioning and operant conditioning. and then this can explain certain really important aspects of human thought and human behavior. in addition to this, behaviorism and particularly the work of skinner, has given as powerful tools for training and for teaching for people including children but also for non-verbal creatures, and has been an important contribution to the world in that. but where it goes wrong, i think, is that it underestimates the scope and power of human mental life. if the problem of freud is that his theories were too all encompassing and too vague and too ungrounded in empirical effect to ultimately become a successful theory of the mind. the problem with skinner is that when taken specifically, his theories just fail to explain the richness of human mental life. we'll talk about all sorts of things about the mind that the ideas of behaviorism are simply not sufficient to address. but i'll end by pointing out that, just like freud, skinner's ideas live on, and deservedly so. there's a lot to behaviorism that even now the most nativist, the most cognitivist psychologist still has to contend with.
the topic of this lecture is development. i want to begin by showing you a movie, one you may have already seen before, it went viral quite a few years ago. i like this video because it illustrates some central themes that we'll be talking about, and also gives you a chance to look at some real children and how they interact. what you'll see here will tell you a little bit about morality, about good and evil, kinship, love, sadism, self-control, and most of all, humor. charlie, charlie, bit me. ouch, ouch, ouch charlie, ow. charlie, that really hurt. charlie bit me and that really hurt charlie and it's still hurting. everything i talk about in intro psych, i find endlessly interesting, but i have to admit i find development more interesting than most topics, it's something that i've worked on all of my professional life, i continue to study development in my lab at yale. i think development and developmental psychology deals with foundational questions that have always puzzled us and that have tremendous intuitive interests. so, one question concerns morality and the origin of moral thought, and you could imagine two very different views, one is, that we start off as immoral or at best amoral. so, you may think were immoral because you accept the christian doctrine of original sin, or the freudian idea that we are ids, and unrestrained appetites that need to be socialized, so there's a view by scholars like hobbes and freud, that we start off as animals, nasty and brutish. but there's also another view associated with scholars like jean-jacques rousseau, that suggests that we're basically good. then what happens through culture, is that we can be corrupted, and you see this for instance in people, in contemporary discussions we talk about prejudice and racism, and they'll insist that we're not naturally, prejudice or racist. to the extent we can become that way is because of the corrupting influence of culture. children start off good at least in that domain, and then sometimes society makes them worse. we'll talk about research that explores these very questions later on in the course, and more generally we're going to ask about the state of the art empirically, on children's morality. second question has to do with continuity, and what's the relationship between children and adults. so, you see this handsome child here, and he grows up to be albert einstein, or this child who grows up to be a considerably worse adult, one of the worst of them all. there's a lot of interest in the extent to which our adult natures, the extent to which the way we are right now, was sort of set in stone. either when we were born, because of our genes, or at least but a time or two or three. it's an interesting question for instance, how much an interview with a three-year-old can predict the way the three-year-old would turn out. it turns out that when studies are done, a 90 minute interview for three-year-old, does predict personality on certain standard scales, the quality of their personal relationships, whether or not they have a job, criminal behavior and so on. so, to some extent, as the poetic phrase goes, the child is father to the man. a third question is the question of cognitive development, which is, how much of what we know now we're born with, and how much we have to learn? psychologists, developmental psychologists talk about three different views, one is empiricism, which is we start off empty and then we learn and learn and learn and learn. you've seen this in the last lecture and discussions of behaviors and this was the behaviors idea. a second view is nativism, which is associative noam chomsky, rejects the idea that learning plays a critical role and it says, we actually are born with rich powerful structure systems in our brain. then there's a third view, constructivist. the constructivist view is defended by john piaget, i'm going to talk about this in the next two sections and you'll see that it shares with the empiricist view. the idea of learning, interaction dealing with environment, makes us what we are. but it shares with the nativist view, the idea that the mind is actually quite a complex, and the course of learning is not merely the accumulation of information, let alone the accumulation of conditioned responses, but rather something far more interesting and far more elegant.
i said before that if you've heard of one psychologist, it's going to be sigmund freud. if you've heard of two, it's probably going to be sigmund freud and bf skinner. but if you've heard of developmental psychologists, it's probably going to be jean piaget. jean piaget was the founder of the modern study of developmental psychology. a lot of the methods and observations and rich theories that we now build from came out from his work. he had a vibrant school. he had many students, and he had a really interesting influence on our field. and his research program was genetic epistemology. and one way to put it, which i think is admittedly too crude, but we'll try this out, is that jean piaget ultimately wasn't interested that much in children. rather, he was interested in the development of knowledge in the human species. and the way he pursued that interest, though, because you can't study the human species, it's not in front of you, you have to infer it through other sources, is to look at it in individual children. the idea that john piaget believed is that, well, to put it in a very snooty phrase, ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny. and you can forget the phrase, but what the idea would mean is that you can see the development of the species is repeated, recapitulated, in the development of every individual. so what did jean piaget have to say? well, he thought of children as active thinkers. he may call them little scientists trying to make sense of the world. and he described these understandings as schemas. and schemas were mental systems. so you could already see that although piaget was in some way had views congenial to those of empiricists with his emphasis on learning, he is already departing from them in his believe that there could be mental structures in the head. and these schemas were frameworks that we build upon to acquire knowledge. and for piaget, there were two psychological mechanisms that lead to the transformation of these schemas. and to sometimes to the creation of new schemas. one is assimilation. so assimilation is the process of taking in new information and new experiences and matching it up with an already existing schema. so imagine a baby who already knows how to suck on his mother's breast, but now the baby sucks on a rattle or sucks on his own toes. and then there's accommodation. and accommodation is the process by which existing schemas are changed, or new schemas are created, in order to fit the new information and new experience. so a child who has to suck on his rattle or his toes is going to do so in a somewhat different way than sucking on his mother's breast. and that's a very concrete, maybe not so interesting example. but piaget argued that this held, too, for more abstract and intellectual attainment. so that there are schemas having to do with objects or number or people. and the baby's understanding, ultimately the child's understanding, get transformed as a result of the process of assimilation and accommodation. now, piaget's method was to ask children, was to talk to children. he has wonderful interviews with children where he would ask them to solve problems, or deal with different situations. and then, question them thoroughly, intensively, about the reasoning behind their solutions. and this is an interesting view, and a radical view, that children think in entirely different ways than adults. so he's like a nativist suggesting that children know it all from the start. but nor is he like an empiricist or a behaviorist who viewed learning simply as the accumulation of new knowledge. or for the behaviorist, new conditioning and new responses. rather, piaget believed that children have theories of the world, and so do we. and children's theories are very different from ours. and so, he proposed that theories transform, and that you could capture development in terms of a series of stages. each stage corresponding to a different style of thinking, a different way of making sense of how the world works. and so, we've already seen a stage theory with freud, talking about anal stage and oral stage and so on. but freud theory was psychosexual. piaget's theory is sort of far more intellectual, far more having to do with styles of reasoning. and in my view, has far more scientific grounding.
so, for piaget, there were four distinct stages. the first is the sensorimotor stage. this is the initial stage, and runs for about the first two years of life. at this stage, the baby is a purely sensory creature. information is gained through the senses and through the child's motoric activities. but the child perceives and manipulates, but doesn't have any reasoning. there's no sense of time, no sensors stability, not even a differentiation early on, between the child and other people. it's at this stage over a lengthy and interesting process, that object permanence is attained. what object permanence is, is the understanding that objects exist independently of one's actions or perceptions of them. so, if i have a ball and i put it behind a screen, you know even though the ball is at a site, that it will continue to exist. this might seem so obvious, it's barely worth saying. but piaget's claim was, that before about six months of age, babies act as though objects remove from site are gone. they're so caught up, in the sensation, in the hearing now, that they lack the ability to appreciate object permanence. for instance, this is why according to piaget, babies are so amused by peekable. you cover up your face, and then reveal it, and then babies crack up or gasp and surprise or whatever, and it's because when you cover up your face, they think you're gone. then when you open it up, you reappear, which is amazing. so, that's the first stage. the second stage, which has been the subject of most psychological development on research is age from 2-7. the baby is now a child and starting to reason. they have object permanence, they have other capacities, they can think, they can differentiate themselves from others, they have a rudimentary understanding of time, but they have certain very interesting limitations. they can reason, but they can't reason into higher order away that you and i can. one illustration of this, is what piaget called egocentrism. so, children are egocentric. he didn't mean this in a way that when i say oh, my best friend is egocentric. meaning he cares only for himself, doesn't care about other people. what piaget meant was, children literally can't see the world through another's eyes, they literally can't understand that other people have different perspectives than they have. so, one classic illustration of this, is the three mountains task. into three mountains task, the child is put in a position where he looks at three mountains of different heights in different orientations, and he's asked to draw it. for instance, he could draw it pretty well as a kid a four or five year old. but now, he's asked, "how would somebody who's on the opposite side of the stage draw? who sees it from a different angle." at this point in development, children according to piaget, they are just incapable of understanding other people who have different perspectives and draw the mountains in different ways. they believe other people draw the mountains as they do. in general, piaget believed that for children, they didn't quite get the idea that they could know something and another person couldn't know it, or that other people could know things that they don't. they are egocentric in that they think the world as they see it, is pretty much the world as everybody else sees it. that's our first main limitation. the second main limitation, is according to piaget, they lack the concept of conservation. what conservation is, is the idea that certain operations on the world will change some properties but not others. an adult appreciates that the number of things will remain constant even if you move them around. if i have a bunch of checkers and i slide some of them to make them take up more space and they say, "are there more checkers here?" you'd laugh and say, "of course not, they're just spread out". but kids can't conserve a number through a transformation, and so they think that there are now more. similarly, if you pour water into a container that's every different shapes or the water that becomes higher or takes up more space lengthwise or something. for an adult, is the same amount of water, volume of water is conserved across the transformation, but for kids, you put water into a tall glass and say, is there are more now, and they i'll say yes. there's a lot of findings of piaget that you could really question, and are very critical. we'll get to some of that. but i'll tell you, this is really cool, you can really do this if you have a kid. so, for instance, you could do make the stakes count. you have some m and ms, that you have some m and ms, any kid has m and m's and you say, "who has more and which ones do you want?" the kids might count and say, "about the same". then you take one pile of m and ms and you spread them out and now you say, who has more and because i want the ones that are spread out because now there's more, which is kind of nuts. the next stage around age seven, is the concrete operational stage. at this point, the kid is pretty sophisticated. you have less egocentricity, more logical thought, you don't have problems with conservation. but still even at this point, there's an inability to reason fully abstractly or fully hypothetically. one way to put it, is the child isn't quite capable of scientific reasoning at this point. but here's an example, suppose all of a sudden i had back pain, and driving it why don't i have back pain. so, i might do experiments. i might say, "well, maybe i should flip my mattress," see how that makes me feel. or i change my shoes or maybe i'm lifting firewood too much, you can experiment. you do, and we do this all the time. when we think about experiments, we think that's something which scientists doing laboratory. but in real life, we often do experimentally, i'd figure, why is our car making this noise? may be able to change the type of gas, you put into it or maybe i'm riding to break too heavy. you try out different things and you make generalizations and so on. this reasoning might come naturally for sophisticated adult, but is not present at this early stage. so, children struggle with it. finally, you become an adult. you enter what's called a formal operation stage where you are a full-fledged adult. unlike freud, piaget didn't believe that there were further traumas, or troubles, or developments, or transformations as an adult. he believed everybody went through these stages. he was rather mellow about them, often he would give lectures in the united states, and he described the american question as, "how do you speed up these stages. i want my kid to get formal operations at age 10". but overall, piaget say that these are just a natural stage that the mind goes through. developing over time through experience and through cognitive restructuring, to bring it from a baby who has an extraordinarily limited understanding of the world to us, who are pretty damn smart.
so how does this piagetian theory work out? well, we complained with regard to freud and skinner that there were all sorts of concerns, including the concern of falsifiability, which is the theories, at least for skinner's theory applied to humans and freud's theory maybe all together, we're often so vague and slippery that they couldn't be falsified. but this is not a problem piaget. so he made interesting and falsifiable claims. if you discovered, for instance, that one year olds did have object permanence or that five year olds can easily pass a certain conservation task, that'd be really damaging to piaget's theory. piaget had a rich theoretical framework. he studied many, many domains. he had all sorts of cool ideas and cool hypotheses. and his work turned out to be extremely generative. generations of developmental psychologists followed up on piaget trying to refute him, trying to refine him, trying to support him. really confident, and i think we should be confident, that he was onto something in his claims about the limitations of children and the idea that children think genuinely differently from adults. and finally is striking findings, these are cool findings and real discoveries. and again, if you have access to a young child and you want to try out some of these experiments yourself, you will find that they often work, and kind of, it will knock your socks off. so there's a lot of good things to be said, but science develops and we move away from initial theories as we get a better understanding. and piaget's theories have some limitations. one limitation is theoretical. so he talked about development in terms of assimilation accommodation. but there's something frustrating here, because what does that really mean? is that more than a metaphor? for some people, piaget was like saying children go some how from having a black and white television set to a color television set. they have radical transformations. but he didn't really provided the theory of how, not at the neurological level, not at a computational level, not at a structural level. and if you would ask, so how does assimilation accommodation really work to give rise to these great transformations from one stage to another? it's not clearly an answer. another critique is methodological. so piaget interviewed children and all of his work was developed based on these interviews, but there are limitations of q&a. children are not very verbal. children are often sensitive to what psychologists call task demands or experimenter demands, where they'll say certain things to please an experimenter. and children, like all of us, might not really know the workings of their own mind. so when modern day developmental psychologists study children, we use all sorts of different methods to study them. and so many of the great developments in psychology aren't necessarily developments of ideas, but more developments of methods. and methods are great. finally, there's now a large consensus within developmental psychology that piaget may well have just been mistaken about what children know. and if you test them improperly, if you test them in different ways and using more clever methods, you'll discover that children, even babies, are far smarter than piaget understood. this brings us to the next topic, which is the modern science of infant cognition. through most of our intellectual history, philosophical history, psychological history, we thought of babies as summarized in this onion headline, babies are stupid. babies just don't know that much. but as a result of this transformative work by scientists, many of them working today, we've come to a different conclusion, one nicely summarized in this life magazine, babies are smarter than you think.
so, how do we make these discoveries about the minds of babies? well, there are different methods. right now, a lot of scientists are very excited about the idea of using neuroscientific methods, machinery that can scan a baby's brain as the baby is looking at some display or ruminating about something. as you can imagine, this is in some way the most elegant possible way of exploring the mental life of a creature who can't yet talk or tell you what he or she is thinking. this work is very exciting and is going on. but, over last couple of decades, infant psychologists have explored different methods that could tell you what a baby is thinking that don't require this sort of brain waves scanning. the methods employ the use of the two things babies can do, even very young babies. they could suck on a pacifier, for instance, and they could look. they could control where their eyes go. these methods human use to explore what babies know. so, take sucking. suppose you wanted to know whether a baby really enjoyed listening to sound of her mother's voice as opposed to the sound of another person. well, you can't ask but what you could do is stick a pacifier in a baby's mouth, put headphones on the baby's ears, and now when the baby sucks on a pacifier, the baby gets to listen to her mother's voice, or in another condition listen to a stranger's voice. you could use this method to discover whether or not babies prefer their mother's voice, and so they do. or you could use this method, for instance, discover whether babies preferred not to listen to their native language. so, a baby born to english-speaking parents, do they prefer english over russian? a baby born to russian speaking parents, do they prefer russian over english? i'll talk about these studies more when we get to language in the next lecture. but that's how the method of monitoring babies sucking behavior can tell you something about how they think and understand the world. probably, the dominant method that people have used to study the minds of babies is looking. this exploits certain factors about about how babies minds work. they kind of work like ours. so, imagine you're sitting down and there's a dog in front of you and a cat in front of you, dog on the right, cat on the left, and you heard the word dog, dog, dog. you'd naturally look towards the dog. if we did that with you, that would show that you knew what a dog was, you know the english word dog was, and you could do the same thing with a baby. similarly, if you looked at something for a while and it was doing some interesting things, sooner or later you get bored. the term psychologists uses, you would become habituated. by telling what bores you, we can tell something about the sort of distinctions that you make and the sort of understanding that you have. so, imagine this. imagine we were to show you a series of pictures of blue things, different shades of blue, blue, blue, blue, blue, blue. sooner or later, you start to drift off. suddenly, we started to show your green things, green, green, green, green, green, you'd probably perk up. you'd say, "this is something new." so, you'd start looking again. now, what can this tell us? well, you wouldn't be able to do this if you weren't able to distinguish blue from green. or as a more interesting example, suppose i was to show you a picture of two dogs, then two cups, then two tables and so on and so forth. then suddenly i was to show you three cats, and three monkeys, and three shoes, you might perk up or you might not. but if you perked up, this will suggest you could tell the difference between two things and three things because you're saying, "here's something different." i'm giving adults as an example, but it should be clear we can use these same studies for babies both to discover their sensory capacities, for instance, can they distinguish different colors? but also their broader conceptual capacities including questions like, can they tell the difference between two things and three things? another way in which looking time can tell you about the contents in somebody's mind, is that we look longer at things that surprise us. imagine you were staring at a man and he gradually placed a hat on top of his head, okay, whatever. but now imagine you were looking at a man and he held a hat on his hand, and the hat gradually floated upwards and landed on his head, you'd stare. why? well, that tells us something about you, which is that you expect people to do things like put hats on her head. but the idea of a hat floating on its own volition is surprising. it violates your expectations. so, we can use that sort of method with a baby to ask, what does a baby expect of the world and what surprises it? in some of the classic studies looking at early baby understanding have used this method. so, take this example. imagine you were to see this, you were to see sort of a brick, and then something sliding back and forth behind it. because you don't see the middle, all you see is the top sliding back and forth and the bottom sliding back and forth, and so this is logically compatible of two possibilities. one possibility as in b, which is that there's a whole stick there. another possibility as in c, what you just see is the top and the bottom. now, c is more compatible with what you're seeing. to infer b, requires making inference about what's behind the brick, that there's a singular object. but you'd be surprised at c. you kind of laugh. it's like a joke. while b is exactly what you'd expect. turns out babies reason the same way. this is a problem for the view that babies lack object prominence because they're inferring the presence of an object even though it was invisible. or take this study. baby stare at a block, and then a screen rises and obscures the block. now, suppose it's true that babies believe out of sight, out of mind. that for babies, if you can't see something, it no longer exists. then maybe should expect that screen to keep falling because there's no block to get in its way. but when you do create exactly that scenario by removing a block through a trap door, babies are surprised as if they are reasoning, "hey, there should have been a block there to stop the movement of the screen." babies think like you do, which is contrary to piaget. that objects continue to exist even after they're out of sight. so, there's been a lot of studies on the physical world, looking at babies understanding of objects are solid, that they obey the rules of gravity, that it traveled through space in continuous pass, that they move when something else bumps into it. these studies find that by the time a baby hits his or her first birthday, the baby possesses some considerably rich physical knowledge. other studies look at numerical knowledge. i'm going to show you this brief video clip from the work of yale psychologist karen wynn, who's had to say my wife, looking at babies understanding of number. this film will show you the sort of studies that were done, and the sort of methods that were used and a quite extraordinary findings that these studies yielded. the first experiment involves addition. six month abigail is placed in front of a stage. great. we'll, first i'm going to introduce you to a couple of things about our state, has a solid box- like in a magic show, she's introduced to the actors and set. watch the screen. she is shown one toy. then two toys. then abigail's addition skills are tested. she's shown the equation of one toy, plus another toy. when the screen comes down there are two toys. but what happens when she's shown something impossible. one toy disappears behind the screen and is joined by a second one. when the screen comes down there's only one toy. something doesn't add up, abigail stares in disbelief as if she knows that this isn't the correct answer. as the scenes alternate between possible and impossible, abigail responds accordingly. staring longer at the impossible and quickly getting bored with the correct answer. next comes subtraction. for this, another six month old connor is brought in to test his skills. he's shown two toys. one toy is taken away. he's left to make his own calculations, but when the screen comes down there are still two toys. connor looks perplexed. it's definitely not what he expected. great job. all right, we're going to get set for the next one back here. next, there's a change. two toys. up goes the screen and look. take away one. where is he going? this time there's only one toy left. connor quickly loses interest because there's nothing engaging in something so obvious. like in abigail's experiment with addition, connor's attention is only attracted when the subtraction doesn't compute. this suggests to the researchers that even at six months of age, babies may have a rudimentary sense of numbers. so, we've talked about babies understanding of the physical world and of number, but now consider babies understand is social world of other people. we've long known that babies have some sort of social adaptations. for instance, they orient toward shapes that look like faces, like the one on the left as opposed to ones that don't, like the one on the right. but more recent studies have found an even richer and more sophisticated knowledge and i think it's particularly cool. at yale university, scientists have designed an ingenious experiment. they wanted to see if babies are born, good or bad. hundreds of parents have volunteered their children. the two scientists behind the project are karen wynn and paul bloom. i would give a year of my life to spend five minutes as a baby, to be able to recapture what it feels like to me that sort of creature. men trust in origin of morality, the origin of good and evil. we want to see what people start off with, do they start off with a moral sense or they start off with good impulses, do they start off evil impulses. then, when you have a sense of that, you could ask yourself, how does this develop into the adult sense of right and wrong, the adult moral behavior? they wanted to find out what is in the baby's brain. to try and unlock the secret, they devised a kind of morality play that each baby will watch. so, this character has a ball that he's playing with and he passes it to this other fellow, who returns it in a nice reciprocal manner. now, he's playing with his ball again and is now going to pass it to this other fellow, who takes it and runs away with it. what they're waiting to see is which character the baby will prefer. but how will they know? now, as an adult seeing this, the person who gave back the ball is good, is fine. the person who ran away with a ball is kind of a jerk. for now, you just say, "well, who's the good guy, who's the bad guy?" you can't do that for a young baby. so, what you do is you hold them out and you get the baby to choose. the experimenter who hands the two puppets to the baby, she doesn't know which puppet was the good one and which puppet was the bad one, so she can't unconsciously influence the baby's preference. hi. hi, do you remember these guys from the show? look at this, look at me. which one would you like? okay [inaudible]. which one would you like? [inaudible]. that one? good job. okay, that was the nice one. aswit has chosen the good puppet. the fact is that about 70 percent of babies do. paul believe that this is a sign that these babies are drawn towards kindness and that this is a glimmer of a moral feeling.
so, if you're being observant here, you'll notice there's a bit of a problem. i just talked about all the evidence that babies have powerful knowledge of the physical and social world, but what about the phad and observations? i also talked about all of these studies finding that kids get it wrong, that kids think differently about the world, like kids don't understand certain things that come naturally to adults. in any adequate theory of development has to explain what kids know and what they don't know. also, there's other work since pha finding some really interesting limitations on the part of children, and in particular on the part of children's social reasoning. so first, i'm going to show you this film clip that dramatically illustrates a way in which kids are just different from adults. watch this wonderful example with psychologists joan pascal and three-year-old, jacob. you're going to choose one of the stickers and he's going to choose one of the stickers, but he always chooses first and he always wants the one that you really want. he doesn't care if you're sad. let's put monkey into another room so that he doesn't know which sticker you really want. you tell me, which sticker do you really like? which sticker do you not want? now i'm going to bring back mean monkey, and he's going to choose first. remember, he always wants the sticker that you really want, he doesn't care if you're sad. so think of what you can do or say so that he doesn't get the one that you really want. here comes mean monkey. which sticker am i going to choose? jacob, which sticker do you really want? oh, well then i'm going to take that one so you get to take this one. joan repeats the experiment several times with each child, giving them ample opportunity to deceive the monkey as to what they really want. tell me which sticker you really like. that one. which sticker do you not want? that one. okay. jacob, which sticker are you going to take? well then, i'm going to take that one, and you are going to have this one. bravely accepting, three-year-old jacob never figures out that the monkey can be fooled. but what about patrick, 18 months older, and already with a knowing gleam in his eyes. so that he doesn't know which sticker you really want. which one do you really like? point to which one you really like. that one. which sticker do you really not want? which is a yucky sticker? that one. okay. well, leave those stickers there i'm going to bring in mean monkey. let me see which one i want. patrick, which one do you really like? oh, well, then i'm going to take that one and you get to have that one. i had my fingers crossed. patrick has also crossed the threshold into the adult world. he's now old enough to know that he can think things that others don't, that his thought are his alone. from about four and a half to five, they suddenly and rapidly get that knowledge. they begin to think about other people's thoughts. they begin to think that somebody can think something different from what they know, that people's thoughts very are private and maybe incorrect. people can have false thoughts about something that they know to be true. once you understand that, then you can explain all sorts of things about why people do things which seem strange to you. they're looking for things and you know that that's not where they are. it also means then that you can understand how to surprise people, how to trick people because once you've met the split between the mind and the world, then you can think about people's minds and manipulate the way the world is, so that they come to believe certain things about it. we'll take this classic finding, and this is one of the major findings in development of psychology, one of the most interesting discoveries of the difference between children and adults. the gist of this is that up until the age of about four or five, children don't understand something really important about the minds of other people. they don't understand that other people can have false beliefs. so to test this, this is one classic task that explores this known as the sally & anne test. so, i'll walk you through it. we'll pretend that you're a child, i'll walk you through it. so first i introduced you to the characters. this is sally. sally has a basket. this is anne. anne has a box. sally has a marble and sally's going to put it in the basket. there's anne, anne's watching her put into the basket. then sally leaves. then anne gets up, takes the marble out of the basket and puts it in the box. now sally returns and she wants to play with her marble. so question, where will sally look for her marble? now, i bet what you will say being a sophisticated neurologically intact adult is, ''she'll look in the basket, that's where she put it.'' but kids don't say that. kids say, she'll should look in the box because that's where it is. more generally, children have a lot of problems realizing that other people could have beliefs about the world that are false. this is something which really does need to be explained.
so how do we explain development? well, there are different and compatible approaches. so one set of explanation appeals to neural changes, changes in the child's brain. we talked about neurons in the first set of lectures. and it turns out that there is changes in the number of neurons that you have through development. maybe surprisingly the big story of development isn't that the brain becomes more and more interconnected, it isn't more and more connectionary neurons, but rather fewer and fewer. so a lot of what goes on in early brain development is pruning, the getting rid of neural connections. and it's this that somehow makes more advanced, more mature thought possible. another aspect of brain development is modernization. and what this means is that the myelin sheath around neurons that makes them run faster and more effectively takes time to develop. this develops all the way through adolescence. in fact, more generally parts of the brain are not fully developed until quite late in life. and in particular, the frontal lobes, the part of brain just behind your forehead, takes considerable time to develop and is not fully developed in adolescence, let alone in children or babies. and this can be telling because it could be part of a child's problem has to do with inhibition, which is what the frontal lobes are good at. so my favorite example of this is from the charlie bit my finger video is the very beginning of this lecture. so remember that charlie is chomping down on the kid's finger, and then the kid's yelling and charlie decides to get the finger out of his mouth. but look at what he does, if it were you, you'd just open up your mouth and stop biting. but it's like charlie can't. once he start into biting, he can't stop. and so what he does is, he takes his hand and pulls his brother's finger out of his mouth. and more generally, a lot of the problems with kids behavior might be because they can't inhibit absolute dominant response. and more generally the idea is that neurological differences in how kids cope with different problems, how they answer questions, how they deal with impulses and distractions might lead to a lot of differences between children and adults. but then there's a more general sort of theory compatible of neural development, but different and actually more piagetian. which is that piaget was right, children really do think about the world differently from adults. this explains for instance why they fail a conservation ask. why they think that when you spread out a bunch of objects, there is now more of them. and when you pour liquid into a different shape plasters now more of it. and now one criticism about piaget is that there is vagueness as to how do you characterize this difference, what's going on, what changes occurred through development, but people know working around that. so susan carey who is now at harvard, my graduate adviser many many years ago. for instance he's argued that conceptual change in children should be thought of as akin to changes in scientific theory by adult scientists. in fact, she was very influenced in her work by thomas kuhn's classic work, the structure of scientific revolutions, which describes the difference between a newton and an einstein. not that the einstein knows more, not that the physicist in the einsteinian tradition knows more than the physicist in the newtonian tradition, but rather they see the world in different ways. the difference between a four year old and an adult in thinking about the physical world should be akin to the difference between a newtonian physicist and a contemporary physicist in understanding of the world. and this is one dominant, very interesting approach. so developmental psychology is a vibrant field and there's a lot of debates here. and one of the debates is whether this sort of theory is right. so development psychologists who are interested in developmental change are likely to want to contrast to general views. one is that there are large scale changes between childhood and being an adult. this was of course freud's view as you go through these major psycho-sexual changes. it's also piaget's view, and it's also the view of people like susan carey, who i just talked about or argued that general profound changes in theories of the world. but there's an alternative. an alternative focuses on the idea that the brain contains specific modules, specific cognitive systems with their own developmental trajectory. and we'll talk more about this throughout the course. but the idea of modules is that we have special systems in the head that are specialized for different things. they're specialized for dealing with the physical world, dealing with the social world. and these systems have a lot of innate knowledge, a lot that's built in. and they do develop, but their development is constrained in special ways. now one important case study for such a modular view is at a languid development. and that's what we'll talk about next lecture. but another one is social development or social understanding. and one of the case studies that has interested a lot of people in a modular conception of development is the case of autism. so autism, many of you are familiar with this, it is a disorder. it's prevalence is debated. there's a lot of controversy over how common it is and how one chooses to define it. but say roughly 1 and 2 out of 1,000. and for autism spectrum disorder, which includes asperger syndrome and a lot of milder deficits, it's about 10 in 1,000. people with this disability, with this syndrome are often boys. and the marks of it are a lack of social connectedness, language impairment, you treat people like objects and so on. and this has led to the theory that autism is caused by damaged module, is caused by a damaged capacity for a social reasoning. i want to pursue this a little bit, but i should know that there's certain aspects of autism that can't be explained or at least can't be explained easily through this theory. for instance, individuals with autism are often hypersensitive to sounds. they're often obsessed with routines. they engage in stereotypical movements, like they do the same thing over and over again and they like to dance or flap their hands. sometimes they'll do self-mutilation. if you think about autism in terms of very high functioning autistic people like temple grandin, or many celebrities, or scientists are viewed, he or she is autistic. that can be correct characterization, but notice that a lot of people with autism are severely autistic. they don't communicate, they don't speak, they can't make their way into the world by themselves. anyway, the idea proposed by simon baron-cohen and others, is that autism is caused by damage to a social reasoning module. and what's interesting in support of this is that individuals, even who are otherwise high functioning individuals of autism tend to fail at exactly those tasks that tab social reasoning. so just like you average four years old or your average three years old will fail at salient task, your average adult with autism even if he or she is otherwise pretty high functioning might also fail. or take this simpler task developed by simon barron cohen. you see a display like this and you're asked, which chocolate will charlie take? now for most of us the answer's kind of easy. you'll take the one that he's looking at, most likely. but individuals of autism don't naturally make that sort of inference. so one debate is whether a modular view can best characterize the course of development as opposed to a sort of more large scale theory like that of piaget or carey. another question is if there are modules, what are they? so people talk about a module for understanding a physical world, a naive physics perhaps, and a model for understanding people, a theory of mind or a naive psychology. but people have also proposed modules for understanding physical artifacts or groups of people sort of naive sociology or the biological world. and when developmental psychologists get together and have arguments, those are the sort of things that they're likely to argue about. a third question is that extent there are profound differences between the minds of children and adults, what role does language play? so babies and young children think very differently than older children and adults. and babies and young children don't speak. they don't understand language. but older children and adults do. and one can ask the extent to which learning to speak changes your understanding of the world. and this is so interesting when i put it off until next lecture on language. so finally, i want to end by asking a question, who cares about development? so suppose these issues simply do not rock your bone. you dont care about imparecism or ananias, you don't care about continuity or piaget or object permanence. you just don't even care about children, you're just interested in adults. still, it turns out that a lot of questions about adults, about adult psychology can be addressed through the study of children. and i want to give you what i think is a wonderful example by the late paleontologist, stephen jay gould, about zebras. so here's a question about zebras, about adult zebras. are zebras white animals with black stripes or they black animals with white stripes. this kind of a cool question. i have actually done the foggiest idea what the answer is, but i know people do know the answer. and the way they know the answer is by studies of development. you could see through studies of embryonic development and development when zebras are young, what the original coloring of the zebra is and whether these are black stripes or whether they're white stripes. more generally, we should end by considering the wisdom of the great biologist, darcy thompson, who in a plea for understanding importance of development said, everything is the way it is because it got that way.
this lecture is about language. and from a theoretical standpoint, language is where the action is. if you have a theory about the mind and how it works, you would better explain language. and different theories are assessed and judged on how well they succeed at capturing this astonishing human capacity. whether we're talking about philosophers like aristotle, plato, hume, locke, psychologists like freud and skinner, modern day approaches that computational analysis or cognitive nerve science, evolutionary theory, cross cultural psychology, if you can't explain language, you're not in the game. and language is so significant that there is an entire field devoted to its study, the field of linguistics. and although this is not a linguistics course, it's impossible to talk seriously about language, and the psychology of language without delving into some extent to the science of linguistics. now, i first want to get into a terminological point. what do i mean by language? and when i talk about language, at least for this beginning phase, i mean systems like english and dutch and french and navajo and mandarin and so on. now, you could use language in other ways. you could use the word language to describe animal communication or music or any communication system you want. and there's nothing wrong with this. i hate terminological arguments. people are free to use language any way they choose. but from a scientific purpose, when we discuss language and how it's learned and how it's encoded in the brain, we have to be clear what we're talking about. and as a starting point i want to talk about this more restricted version, the sorts of things that people use exclusively from day to day life, both spoken languages like english and sign languages like american sign language. and once we come to some insight about how all of that works, we could then step back and then see whether the same principles we find for those languages in a restrictive sense apply to music, or to a bird song, or to art and whatever. before proceeding, i want to do something which i haven't been doing in the other lectures. i want to recommend a couple of books. i want to recommend the language instinct by steven pinker, which is a classic introduction to the science of language. and one reason why i want to give it this shout out is that some of my examples that follow and some of my analyses are going to be based on his book. so this is crediting him with this. i also want to recommend john mcwhorter's book, the power of babel, which takes a somewhat different approach than pinker and looks more at language as a historical artifact, how it changes over time. less psychology, less evolution, but a lot more history, and they're both wonderful books.
when i teach my introduction psychology course at yale, i have a class on language. one of the things i do is this demonstration, i put this sentence up on the screen and then i walk through the class and there's about 400, 500 students, and i have the students who come from different countries, different societies say it in their native language. so i began i say it in english, "the girl thinks that the house is big," and the student say it in french, spanish, mandarin, and turkish, russian, japanese. i go through two dozen languages, i have tried to get something as a sign language like american sign language along the scene qubcois. one thing which is obvious is that though this is a pretty abstract notion, all languages can express it. there are about 6,000 spoken languages in the world and many other sign languages and nobody says, "well, i can't say that in my language." languages share their extraordinary expressive power. on the other hand, something which is also obvious is the languages are different, they sound different. i know english, i know a little bit of french, a little bit of spanish, but the rest of the languages are incomprehensible to me and to most other students in the class. so a korean speaker can say this perfectly, but, and this is kind of obvious, an english speaker doesn't understand it. so, what can we say about languages, about the power of languages and how languages are different in what they have in common? well, one observation comes from charles darwin who wrote, man has an instinctive tendency to speak as we see in the babble of our young children, while no child has an instinctive tendency to bake, brew, or write." what darwin is saying here is that language is special, language is something which is instinctive and as such differs from other human capacities like baking or brewing or writing, and here darwin is making a distinction between language and its natural modality of speech and as we'll see sign versus reading and writing which really is unnatural and needs to be learned. every human society has language, fitting with darwin's idea that language is instinctive and natural, it shows up everywhere. humans have come across other societies which lack architecture, where people don't wear much clothing, where all sorts of technology that some societies have these societies lack. but humans have never stumbled across another group of humans which lack language, language is universal. now, this doesn't show that languages is instinctive or that is built into the brain. because language might have even been invented once and spread through history. i think right now, it's going to be very hard to find a society that lacks soccer or coca-cola. but that's not because soccer and coca-cola aren't distinctive, it's because soccer and coca-cola were thought up at one point and then spread through the world. maybe language is like this, but there's good reason to believe that it's not and that darwin is right. one interesting source of evidence here is a phenomenon known as creolization, and so creolization in its standard case involves people who are involved in the slave trade, the production of tobacco, cotton, coffee, sugar who would bring together and mix slaves and laborers from different language backgrounds. so these people would work together but they didn't have a common language. what often happens is they develop a makeshift jargon which is called a pidgin, p-i-d-g-i-n which involve strings of words borrowed from the language of the plantation owners, often from people's own native tongues. but there's no word or no grammar, imagine yourself locked in a room working with a bunch of people with no common language, but you had to work together so you'd make a sort of common communication system. now, the question which arises is, the children in these societies, the children of the slaves were often brought up independently from their parents in a collective setting and what they heard was mostly a pidgin, and so the question is what would they come to know? and you might imagine well, you're exposed to a pidgin, you'll learn a pidgin. but this isn't actually what happens. what's interesting is children are built so that they take this non-linguistic system as rudimentary system and transform it into a real language with syntax and morphology and phonology and we'll learn what these are in a second. but a real language, which is known as creole. so when you hear about a creole now of which many people speak, that remarks in this historical origin of creole was once a pidgin and has been transformed into a language and that tells us something about the human mind. there are actually some modern cases of creolization that had been studied. so imagine a child who is born deaf to hearing parents, so the parents understandably enough want to communicate with the child so they quickly learn a sign language through which to communicate with the child but they're not, because it's second language learning which is difficult. the language that the parents use is more of a pidgin and children are exposed to a pidgin. but what often happens particularly if children are raised in a community of other children in the same situation? is that they creolize, they take this simple communication system that they're exposed to and they transform it into a full-blown language. this is interesting, this tells us something about our capacity and our expectations with regard to language. furthermore, just as every normal society has language, every normal human has language. this is true by definition if a child reaches the age of three or four and doesn't speak, there's a serious problem going on which requires serious attention and that's different from other things. not everybody knows chess or rides a bicycle, but language seems to be the sort of thing that everybody comes to possess. it's no surprise then that there are specific areas in the brain that are devoted to language. we'll talk a little bit more about these later on in the course. what's a little more controversial is what these brain areas do and these genes cause. there's no doubt that humans have a special capacity for language, but the precise nature of this capacity whether it's something specific and designed for language or whether it's a more general set of capacities that allow people to learn language that's a matter of controversy. so, what else can we say about language? well, when linguists talk about language, they say that language has the property of creativity and this can mean different things, it creative, is often used to describe special abilities and that's not what we're talking about here. we're meaning, that normally, for normal use of language, people can say what they choose to say and can produce a virtually infinite number of sentences by one estimate, the number of sentences under 20 words long is 1 with 30 zeros after it. so if it took you five seconds to say a sentence, in order to say all of them you'd have to spend about 100 trillion years. i asked students to stand up and say a sentence that nobody in the history of the universe has ever said before. i'll say one myself, "i saw an episode of tv show black mirror last night and it was quite haunting though i have to say that the ending was a little bit predictable given some foreshadowing early on involving some treatment of out groups and some hints at a powerful technology." it's not the greatest sentence in the world maybe it's not so interesting but you understand it and you've never heard it before. this suggests that language understanding, language comprehension, language production, can't just be a matter of rote memory. if you understood what i said and understand i'm saying now, it can't be because at some point you've memorized the meanings of these sentences, you have to have some way of taking strings of words that are put together in order you've never heard before and making sense out of them. so how do we do this? well, we do this through rules and principles. we have these abstract and unconscious rules in our heads that let us take strings of words and make sense of them. when i'm talking about rules of language, i'm not talking about things like don't say ain't or don't end a sentence with a preposition, these are not rules that you're forced to comply within school, they're not what linguists call prescriptive rules which is how you should use language, rather these are abstract and unconscious rules that you have. you don't even know you have them that allow you to figure out the virtually infinite strings of sentences you could be exposed to. these are what the things that linguists study. so for instance, you hear a sentence, "the pig is eager to eat," and instinctively, immediately in a fraction of a second, you understand that the eating here is to be done by the pig. but if you hear a sentence, "the pig is easy to eat," in the same fraction of a second you realize this means that the eating is of the pig not by the pig. or take a sentence, "bill knew john liked him." any speaker of english realizes that this could mean that bill knew john liked bill, it could have other meanings but it could mean that bill knew john like bill. but if you hear the sentence, "bill knew that john liked himself." this can't mean that bill knew that john liked bill, it has to mean that bill knew that john liked john. if this is the sort of thing that fascinates you and you have this tremendous hunger to work out the rules explaining how we do this, what rules are working, how do you characterize them best, how many of them are universal. then you may well decide you want to devote your life to becoming a linguist because that's what linguists do and to me this is one of the coolest enterprises ever. so, we characterize languages in terms of these rules and principles and it turns out that language can be characterized at different levels. you can talk about the sound system of language phonology, you can have about words and how words are composed, morphology, and you could talk about how words are combined to make phrases and sentences which is syntax, and i'm going to talk about these three things in turn.
so, let's start at the most basic level. phonemes are the building blocks of language. phonology is the branch of linguistics that studies them, studies what phonemes there are, and how they're put together to construct words. english has about 44, i think. as you can tell, since there's only 26 letters in the english written language. phonemes and letters don't match up one-to-one. in particular, some single letters in english can correspond to multiple phonemes. it turns out there's a universal body of phonemes, and different languages select from them. interestingly, sign languages of which there are many, work the same way. there are basic units of sign basic primitive movements from which all signs are built from, and different sign languages choose different subsets of these possible movements. now, when you learn a language, there's a lot that has to be learned. you have to learn what phonemes your language has, and i'll return to this a little bit when i talk about language acquisition. you have to learn the rules and principles through which the phonemes can combine. this helps you know what in your language is a possible word, and what isn't. most interestingly, at least for me, you have to figure out how to segment speech into words. how to use the principles of your language to figure out where the words are. you might think that's silly, children just start off by learning words and then they learn language as a whole. but the problem is that when you listen to a language right now or as a baby, there are no obvious cues to where one word begins and another one ends. this is hard to tell, because there's an illusion. so, as you hear me speak, it sounds as if there's gaps between the words. but this is an illusion caused by the fact that you already know the words. so, once you know what the words are when people say them in a stream, your mind inserts gaps between them. you could tell that happens because when you hear a sentence in another language, like i hope i get this right, hebrew, [inaudible] which i think is where's the bathroom or [inaudible] in french. if you don't know these languages, it just sounds like a garble. you get the impression that everybody speaking your language talks normal words with pauses between them, and everybody speaking other languages just garbles incessantly without meaning. so, knowing the words of english, helps you make sense of sentences, makes you tell, where the words are. but of course, the problem for the child, is the child who doesn't yet know the words of english has to learn and in a context, where it's not clear where the words begin and where they end. this is one reason why language learning is so difficult, and it's one reason why phenology, even the most basic aspect of language, poses some very interesting puzzles.
the next level up is morphology, the aspect of language that deals with words, or more precisely with morphemes. in morphology, where we get into issues of meaning, is based on this extraordinarily neat trick, described by the french linguist, ferdinand de saussure, as the arbitrariness of the sign. the idea is that language works on a principle where anything can connect to anything else. a sign is arbitrary in that sense. so, for instance, the sound, dog, the morpheme, dog, the word, dog, bears no interesting relationship to the creatures that it refers to, those creatures with four legs and a tail that bark. so, there's no way you can tell from the sound of the word or a structure what it refers to. there are some correlations. there are some words that are referred to sound, for instance, do carry some of the meanings. so, the word "grown" kind of sounds like a grown. but those are rare exceptions. the word dog, or table, or microphone, or helmet, don't sound anything like the things that they refer to. so, this makes it possible for languages to refer to an infinity of different things, an indefinite number of different things through the arbitrariness of the sign. now, i'm kind of blurring together right now words and morphemes. the field of linguistics that studies is not called wordology, its called morphology. so, what's the difference? well, a morpheme is the smallest meaningful unit. it's the smallest thing. its the most basic thing you have to learn. you can't infer the meaning of a morpheme, it's arbitrary and you have to learn it. this is different from a word because you can combine morphemes to make words. so, can you actually can understand certain words even if you've never heard them before. so, take as an example dog and complain. those are single morphemes. complain as more than one syllable, which is a phonological fact about it, but it's a single morpheme. you have to learn what complain means. but now, compare dogs and complain. now, dogs and complain are each single words, but actually, you don't have to have heard them before to know what they mean. if you know the word dog, and you know the morpheme-s, which means plural, you could figure out that dogs refers to more than one dog. if you know complain, and then you know the morpheme-ed, which means occurred in the past, you know that complained, even if you've never heard it before refers to complaining in the past. so, just as we'll see syntaxes generative, allowing us to understand sentences and phrases we never heard before. words are also generative, and that morphemes can combine together to create words we've never heard before. this isn't such a big deal for language like english, but it shows up more in other languages like german or hebrew, which are more productive in how words can be formed. in fact, there are some languages where morphology, combining morphemes into words, there's a lot of work that syntax does for a language like english. now, one question which always comes up is, how many words do we know? now we can refine the question somewhat differently, how many morphemes do we know? how many morphemes does a english speaker on average know? it turns out it's very difficult to tell, because a lot depends on how you define what it is to know a word. estimates are all over the place, but the estimates i trust the most use methods where you take a sample of english words or random sample from a dictionary, and then you quiz people on this random sample, suppose you have 1,000 of them, and then you see how many they know, maybe through a multiple choice test. then if the sample was one percent of the dictionary, you multiply the number correct by 100, and then you get a reasonable estimate of how many words in that dictionary you're averaging the speaker knows. again, the numbers are not precise, but it's quite large. by one estimate, your average english speaker knows of it 8,000, and if you do the math, and this is for your average high school graduates, do the math, this means that from the age one, when you start learning words, to age 17, you learned about 10 new words a day. in fact, what really happens is you learn a few new words a day, as a two-year-old, or a three-year-old, but this pace accelerates. then when you learn to read, you know an extraordinary amount of words. if you just think about words that i'm throwing at you, and i throw some more at you, like apostle, and transmitter, and shoe shine, and beach, valley, i'm just free associating here, but there's a lot of words out there, and we know them, and in a fraction of a second we can retrieve their meaning. so, morphology, or words, or meanings of words, reflects another extraordinary capacity that people possess.
so now we get the syntax. just as morphology has a neat trick of the arbitrariness of the sign, syntax has its own neat trick described by the scholar wilhelm von humboldt as infinite use of finite media. what we have in language is a set of distinct symbols, say words or phrases or categories that words and phrases belong to, and rules that order these symbols, and then other rules that call upon these rules giving rise to the possibility of infinite production of symbol strings, what's called a recursion. this isn't special to a human language. so, other systems that exist have symbols and rules that act upon them such as music and a dna works that way. but our focus here is on language. so, in case this all sounds a little bit abstract and confusing, i want to give a concrete example. imagine a simple language. this simple language has five words. it has three nouns: fred, barney, and wilma; and it has two verbs: thinks and likes; and it has a rule. the rule is, a sentence can expand into a noun and a verb and a noun, in that order. so, what can this rule create? well, you could pick any noun, say, fred, follow it by any verb, say, likes, and follow that by any noun, say, wilma, and now you've produced a sentence, fred likes wilma. how many sentences can this rule produce? well, think about it. you got three nouns and two verbs. so, any noun, then any verb, then any noun is three times two times three, which is 18. this is actually fairly impressive. you had to learn six things, five words in one rule. but you got to generate a series of novel sentences. if you have a lot of nouns, lot of verbs, you could generate a lot of sentences. imagine how many sentences you could create with a 1,000 nouns and 100 verbs. but still, while it's powerful, it's not infinite and we're not getting at the core of language. so now, imagine a more complicated language. this language has the same vocabulary, but it has one more rule. it has a second rule saying, a sentence can lead to a noun followed by a verb, followed by a sentence. so, for instance, you could say, you could evoke rule two; fred thinks barney likes wilma. but you could also use rule two repeatedly. so, you can say fred thinks barney thinks fred likes wilma. because there's no limit to how often you can use this rule repeatedly, there's an infinite number of sentences. so, i'll use it with more regular english examples. so, a simple rule of english creates the sentence, john hates cheese. but we can say something like, my roommate heard a rumor that john hates cheese, where the sentence, john eats cheese, is embedded into another sentence. we could say, it disturbed mary when i told her that my roommate heard a rumor that john hates cheese, or i was amazed that it disturbed mary when i told her that my roommate heard a rumor that john hates cheese, or professor bloom devoted way too much of his lecture talking about how i was amazed at the disturbed mary when i told her that my roommate heard a rumor that john hates cheese. now i can guarantee you, you have never heard that sentence before, but you can understand it. it's unwieldy we could understand it because you could apply rules to it. so, there's no stopping you. it really bothered me that professor bloom and i won't continue. the generativity of language, these rules, these recursive rules give rise to the capacity to produce and understand a lot of sentences. we talked earlier about how many sentences are 20 words long? but take us another example of the tweet. so the tweet, as i'm saying this right now, is 140 characters long. let's forget about numbers and the like. there are 26 characters in english, 27 if you include the space. so, the number of possible sentences you have is 27 to the power of 140, which is a lot. but that's too much because i would include gibberish. so, when you narrow it down to possible english sentences, and the calculations are done in a cartoon xkcd. i have the link up here, if you want to look at it. you'll see that the answer is about two times 10 to the 46. we will never run out of tweets. the fact that our language is governed by rules that generate different possibilities leads to all sorts of things leads to ambiguity. so, take this old joke by groucho marx, where he says, "i once shot an elephant in my pajamas. how it got into my pajamas i'll never know." it plays on to grammatical readings. it turns out that people collect headlines, newspaper headlines, where there's an unintended ambiguity. here's some of my favorite examples: "complaints about nba referees growing ugly", "kids make nutritious snacks", "no one was injured in a blast, which is attributed to the buildup of gas by one town official", and "general arrested for fondling privates." for each of these, you can understand what the intended meaning was, but then you could also realize there's sort of another humorous meaning. but sometimes this isn't entirely funny, the ambiguity of language. so, take the phrase, "let him have it." it turns out that a lot of linguists are interested in the legal implications of language and interpretation of language as in the interpretations of legislation, but also in criminal cases to interpretation of speech, and "let them have it" turned out to be a very important phrase. quite a while ago, there were two brothers in a robbery. one of them was intellectually disabled. they were stopped in the middle of the robbery, and one of the brothers pointed the gun at the cop, and then the cop shouted for him to drop the gun. the brother with intellectual problem said, "let him have it." the first brother then shot and killed the police officer, and they were both charged with murder. now, the guy who shot the police officer explained the murder. but the question is, what about the other brother who said, "let them have it"? it turns out, whether or not you think he's guilty depends on what you think the proper interpretation of the phrase is. "let him have it" could mean give him the gun, let him have the gun, or it could mean attack him. people thought he meant the second thing, and he was found guilty of murder. there's a lot of legal work again, looking at these sort of ambiguities and the role that they play. i'll also mention on a lighter note that the ambiguity of language can lead to humor as in groucho marx and as in one of my favorite authors, richard russo, who writes books with titles like, straight man and nobody's fool. these titles are, i think, deeply clever. straight man for instance refers to a heterosexual man. you refers to a man who is straight and honest, but it also refers to a man, who plays a certain role in a joke. nobody's fool is great because it has two meanings which are almost opposite. nobody's fool, meaning the man you can never fool, he's nobody's fool, or nobody's fool, being a fool that nobody wishes take possession of.
so, we've talked about the structure of languages, what they have in common and how they're different. now, let's turn to the question of language acquisition. how is it that we get from a baby who doesn't know any language, all the way through an adult who does know language. now, one radical perspective on this has been proposed by the linguist noam chomsky, who we met in our discussion of behaviorism, who was one of the major critics of skinner's siri. chomsky is probably the best known linguists in the world. he is strongly identified to school of philosophical and psychological thought known as nativism. nativism has another meaning in a political context. what it means for a psychologist or philosopher, is the idea that we're born with a lot of knowledge, a lot of knowledge is innate. chomsky has argued this particularly in the domain of languag. in fact, he says, that we should see the development of language not so much as learning, but as growth and so here's a quote, "no one would take seriously the proposal that the human organism learns through experience to have arms rather than wings, or that the basic structure of particular organs results from accidental experience. [language] proves to be no less marvelous and intricate than these physical structures.. why, then, should we not study the acquisition of a cognitive structure like language more or less as we study some complex bodily organ?" now, i have some sympathy for this view and i want to later on present some evidence that language does seem to show certain patterns that hint at universality. hint that in some way we can see language as akin to a bodily organ and different from a product of culture like baseball games or british history. but at the same time, it's clear that language development does involve learning, that is, it's impossible to explain how we come to know language without accepting that we attend to what others around us do and do as they do and pick up the way they speak. this has to be the case, because language is differ. so, consider an example from each of our three domains. in english, there's a phonetic distinction between l and r. so, i'm giving you the letters, but it's really the sounds associated with them. we know this because words can differ in meaning, depending on whether it's which phoneme is used. there's a different in lip, which is a part of the mouth versus rip. which means to tear up something. the other languages don't make this distinction. some languages have a sound [inaudible]. that will distinguish certain words. other languages just use tonal distinctions to make distinction in words and english doesn't have those. so, plainly part of what it is to come to know a language has come to learn their phonetic properties language. another thing is part of what is to know a language is to learn the meanings of words, morphology. an english child has to know that this is a dog, while a french child has to know this is a chien, [inaudible]. while a child learning one of the thousands of other languages has to pick up the corresponding sound of those with it. finally, there's syntax. so, in english, if you wanted to say that bill hit john, that bill was to hitter and john was hit, you'd say in this order, bill hit john. if all you knew was english you would think this is inevitable, how else would you do it? but in fact, other languages just do it differently. some languages would say, bill hit john, by saying, bill john hit, or even john hit bill, where the phrases are in different order to capture the same meaning. all of this phenology, morphology and syntax has to be learned. but, as chomsky points out, if it is learning is learning of a fundamentally different character than other forms of learning. for one thing as mentioned before, everybody learns language, it's a universal part of development, all normal children come to have it and this is true in every human society. more interestingly, there are specific impairments of language. so, things can happen to you as an adult, like brain damage, or trauma, or stroke, or as a child as an a developmental disorder, or a genetic disorder, that could leave you bereft of language. it could leave you unable to speak or understand. this is relevant because many people believe that all that you need to learn language is, for instance, to be very smart, or to want to communicate. but plainly, that can't be true, because there are people who are walking around who are very smart and desperately want to communicate and they can't learn language. this supports the idea, that language is to some degree special, it iss not reducible to other human capacities. also, on the theme of learning, language is learned, but it's not learned in through feedback or specific training. there are many people who believe that if you don't really teach your kid to talk, your kid won't talk. just as in other societies, people would believe that if you don't teach your kid to stand up or walk, he'll never walk. there are some societies, for instance, where they pile up sand under the kids butt so they could gradually gets more and more upright until he's walking. anything if you didn't do that he never learned to walk. we look at that and say that's silly, you don't need it, kids learn to walk on their own. but, those societies would look at our society with this obsession with flashcards, and drills, and learning how to calibrate your speech to the kid, and tremendous focus on what you say to a kid to make them learn to speak, and they'd say that's silly, you don't need to do that. they're right, cross-cultural leaders, great differences in how we speak to our children, or whether we speak to our young children and all. this seem to have little or no effect on whether or not kids talk, all kids talk regardless. now, it's also true that in western societies people give feedback to their children. so, often you'll correct your child if he says something. some people have speculated along lines of behaviorism, that this feedback perhaps as a reward and punishment, shapes the child's learning. but, we now know that this isn't true. for one thing, you don't need it. again, even in western societies some parents don't reinforce and punish their kids for what they say and yet kids nonetheless learn to talk. moreover, even the parents who do give their kids reinforcement and punishment don't tend to do it for the phenology, or the morphology, or the grammar, but more for the appropriateness or cuteness of what kids say. so, we correct kids if they get their facts wrong. we don't typically correct them if they get their grammar wrong. just imagine the child who says, "i loves you mommy." it's very unlikely that the kid's mother will say, "oh, that's terrible, you got your morphology wrong, you got your verb wrong, grow up." we will accept cute, but wrong statements, if a kid says, "i hate your guts mother." the mother is unlikely to shower that kid with praise for his perfectly formed grammatic [inaudible]. so, children learn language by absorbing the language around them, that much has to be true. but, it doesn't seem as if any teaching, certainly any reinforcement or punishment plays a critical role. so, what do we know about language development? well, what i'll do now is, i'll just kind of walk through this stagees without saying much about the psychological mechanisms that drive kids from one stage to another, but provide you with descriptive overview what happens. so, the child's born and when a child is born, he or she likes listening to his or her own language. there's all sorts of clever studies that explored this. my favorite studies involve putting headphones on the baby and this baby could it be a newborn baby. then hook the baby up to a pacifier were the baby will suck on a pacifier and gets to hear voices, depending on how long the baby sucks. it turns out that kids who are raised in societies where people speak english, prefer to listen to english than to listen to russian, and kids raised in russian speaking society prefer to listen to russian than to listen to english. what's particularly cool is very early on, children can discriminate all the phonemes of natural language. i said before there are many many phonemes in english and every other languages just chooses a subset of them. but kids are sensitive to them from the very start your average, your kid born in america to english-speaking parents can distinguish between bar and par, which are english distinctions, but also can make distinctions between phonemes in czech and hindi, which are not expressed in english. what's really cool is, this capacity goes away. so, this is one way in which kids are better than adults. it's that there are not many examples of this, but this is one example. a baby can make distinctions, can hear distinctions that you can't. this capacity you start off oversensitive and then we whittled down our sensitivity until we're just understanding the distinctions made in their own language. around age seven months starts babbling, kids go ba-ba-ba pa-pa-pa, make sounds like that. fascinatingly, deaf children learning sign language also babble, they babble with their hands producing the equivalent of ba-ba-ba pa-pa-pa. at around the kids first birthday, and there's quite a lot of variance for this, parents shouldn't panic if kids take longer than 12 months, but you know you get the first words, momma, dadda, typically words for objects, actions, properties, milk, give, up, hot, words like that. early on using clever methods, it turns out that there are some sensitivity to word order. so, for instance, you could put a kid down at around a one-year-old, even a one-year-old who isn't yet producing sentences, and put the kid down and there's two screens. on one screen, first, you find out the kid can recognize big burden cookie monster sesame street characters, if not you could use other characters. then you have two screens, in one screen, big bird is pushing cookie monster, in the other screen, cookie monster's pushing big bird, and you say to the kids something like, look big birds pushing cookie monster and you'll see where the kid looks. very early on, you find that the kid looks in an appropriate direction, in a screen that matches the english sentence expressing that action, showing that very early on you have some understanding of word order. around a year and a half, the kid starts to increase the rate of learning words, produces two word sentences, what's called a telegraphic speech. there aren't telegrams anymore, but telegrams used to be ways to communicate where each word you used was very expensive, so you had to kind of put things together, you wouldn't say, "oh, i'm traveling through spain and i've lost my wallet please send me money right now", you'd say, "spain-lost-wallet-need-money." that's how kids talk early on, as if words are very expensive. then, gradually at this point, function morphemes, we talked about them before like, in, of, a, the plural marker 's', the past tense marker 'ed', gradually begin to appear. language continues to develop, then at some certain point, it becomes more difficult to learn a language and people are rarely fully successful. this is true both for second languages and also studies of deaf children learning sign language for first languages. for instance, some really interesting studies to illustrate this looked at people and these were all people who have been in america for many many years, i think for about 30 years, so they've learned a language as well as their aboriginal learn it. the comparison was, when did they start? did they start as babies? did they start as young children? did they start as adolescents? did they start after the age of 17? what you can see in this graph is, that the older you start, past about age three, the less good you are. so, if you start learning english at age three you're fine, but if you start learning english at age 10, at age 15, or age 20, even if you were to speak it for 30 years, you still will not be perfectly fluent. this suggests that, the biological capacity to learn language has a clock on it. like other capacities psychologists have studied, there's a critical period you have to do it within a certain period of development, or you'll never be fully successful.
so, there's a lot more to the study of language that we haven't got to here, and just to list some of the topics. we could say a lot more about language in the brain, how neurons and neural systems and code related to this. we can look at language disorders. we can study reading, and reading is interesting because reading, it of course involves language, but unlike language in the sense we've been talking about so far, reading is not universal. it's a relatively recent human invention, and it's difficult. we can study bilingualism and multilingualism. a lot of people in the world have more than one language in their heads, and how that all works is a fascinating topic. then there's three other topics and i want to spend just a little bit talking with each one of them. we've now characterized language with some degree of precision. we talked about phonology, morphology, syntax, we talked about the stages in which it's learned. we can now ask, do other animals possessed the same sort of language? do they possess language in the sense of english, and chinese, and russian, and so on? this is maybe the most controversial part of this lecture, is people have wildly different views. but my own sense and i think i'm capturing the sense of the feel here is that the answer's no. other creatures have rich communication systems, fascinating communication systems, but they're different from human communication system. you have animals that have a finite list of calls, like vervet monkeys who will have a call for a snake or an animal that's attacking. you have animals that use a continuous analog signal like bees, and then you have random variations on the theme as in birdsong. but what you don't find is phonology, morphology, syntax, arbitrary names, recursive syntax, and so on. there's been some arguments that maybe in some special cases you find something that looks like this. but certainly, if you will look in an objective fashion at the capacities of non-humans, you would never say, well, that's language in the same sense that what we're doing now is language. it seems very different. now, there have been a lot of attempts to teach non-humans, particularly non-human primates like chimpanzees language, and there was a lot of enthusiasm about this many many years ago. but the consensus by now is that these attempts have not succeeded. these animals can develop a limited vocabulary, but it takes a long time to learn. the words, it's very different from children, very limited ordering, and no recursion. you also get highly repetitious speech. these are some samples from an animal, nim chimpsky, you could get the reference of the name, who's been taught to use a form of sign language and these are the sorts of things that nim chimpsky says, "nim eat, nim eat. drink eat me nim. give orange me give eat orange me eat orange." one could wonder theoretically, why would you even expect a chimpanzee to learn human language? we don't expect human babies to learn how to dance like bees, sing like birds or hoot like vervet monkeys. i think a theory more grounded in evolution would predict that each animal would have its own evolve communication system. it's sort of strange to expect one animal to learn the communication system of another. a further topic is language processing. i'm just going to restrict myself to mentioning one issue and giving one demonstration. the issue is, how much does your knowledge of language and your expectation of language influence your perception of it? we actually spoke about this before when we talked about word segmentation. so, as i'm talking you hear gaps between the words. but, the gaps aren't really there. you hear the gaps because your understanding of how english works and what english words are leads you to perceive them. i'll give you another example here of how your knowledge of what somebody is going to say, what somebody said, will influence how comprehensible their speech is. so, to illustrate this, listen to this. now, if you're hearing this for the first time, you probably have no idea what that person just said. so this is what they said, "the study drench is worse than a drenching rain." now, i'll play you back that original sound, and that's all i'm going to say but language processing. the topic i'll end with and i will spend more time on this because i find it incredibly cool and connects to some of my own work is something which people often raise when we talk about language, and this is the relationship between language and thought. so, plainly, language can be used to convey our thoughts, i think something i use my language to express it, and plainly language can influence thoughts. you may not have had any opinion about freud, but if you listen to me talk about him for a little while, maybe this will change your views. but that's all obvious. here's the cool question, "does the language you learn change the way you think? do speakers of languages like english?" think differently than speakers of languages like korean, by dint of differences in the grammatical structure of the languages. so, i chose this example because it's been studied quite a bit. english and korean have different prepositional systems. english uses prepositions like in, an, on and under. while korean uses a different set of prepositions that focus you more on things like whether something is firmly attached to something else. so, a lot of psychologists have studied, children, adults, wondering whether exposure to these different languages changes the way you think about the world. does being exposed to a language as another example, that has special plural marker for [inaudible]. so, in english it's either dog, dogs, one dog or many dogs. but in other languages, you could have one dog, another marker for two dogs, and then something's meaning more than two dogs. does this make a difference for how we think about number? there's a lot of very exciting research on that. that's the one question. the second question is a more general one. is language necessary for abstract thought? so, think about all the things that are uniquely human. we have logic, we have rich mathematics, complicated social structures, cultural learning, extraordinary technology and humans also have language. maybe the fact that we have all these cognitive abilities plus these linguistic abilities are not two separate accomplishments but one goes hand in hand with the other. so, this was a speculation by charles darwin. darwin wrote, "if it be maintained that certain powers, such as self-consciousness, abstraction and so on, are particular to man, it may well be that these are the incidental results of other highly-advanced intellectual faculties; and these again, are mainly the results of the continued use of a highly-developed language." language has cascading effects that makes us smarter. more recently, the philosopher dan dennett. "perhaps the kind of mind you get when you add language to it is so different from the kind of mind that you'd have without language that calling them both minds is a mistake." so, is this true? well, there's an extraordinary amount of debate about it. my comments about animals and their lack of a human-like language are controversial, but this stuff gets really controversial, and people have different views. so i'll give you a sort of a warning, that what's going to follow is my perspective. but my perspective is this. there are a lot of studies looking at false belief tasks, the sally-anne task, which involved inferring that other people have knowledge of the world that's false. this is a fairly late developmental accomplishment, and it's impaired in autism, and it's difficult. maybe, you need to have sophisticated language to understand that others can have false beliefs. i think the evidence here is against this. so, for one thing, using very subtle tests, even 15-month olds, can pass the false belief test, and even people with severe aphasia or damage to the parts of the brain that do language can solve false belief tasks. so, it might be that reasoning but other minds is not dependent on language. that's one part of the story. there's a second part of the story, which is number. in here, i think the evidence for the power of language is pretty clear. so i'll quote stanislas deheane, who's one of the world's leading scholars in the study of number, who writes, "without symbols, we may not discriminate eight from nine." but with the help of our elaborate numerical notations, that is language, we can express thoughts as precise as, the speed is 299 million meters per second "without language, we couldn't just express the thoughts staying with argue, we can't even thank them. why would we take this seriously? one reason is a certain distinction we find between non-linguistic creatures, like babies, and dogs, and chimpanzees and linguistic creatures like us, it turns out that these other creatures are capable of some rudimentary mathematical reasoning. even babies know, that 2 plus 2 equals 4, 3 minus 1 equals 2. we saw this research earlier on in this course, and they know that a big number plus a big number equals another big number. but here's what babies don't know, and here's what chimpanzees don't know. they don't know precise numerical relationships. they don't know for instance, that 8 plus 8 equals 16. it might be, in order to understand that 8 plus 8 equals 16, you need a symbol system that allows you to reason about the specific high numbers. that is a creature without language could never come to such a conclusion. so, i'll end the lecture on language with a rather complicated conclusion. it's not surprising it's complicated with complicated creatures, and the complicated inclusion is, that language may be essential for some unique human powers, but not others.
this lecture is on perception and attention. and it naturally matches out with the next lecture, which is on memory. because together, this pair of lectures tells the story of how the world gets from the outside of our heads, finds it way inside, and stays there. it'll tell a story, for instance, how, suppose you were looking outside and you saw a man approaching you in front of the house. not a picture of the scene, but the scene itself. what would happen is the light would bounce of the house, and off of the man, and off of the birds, hit your retina, hit your eye, somehow make it into your brain where you recognize there's a man and there's a bird, there's birds and there's a house and then stay there. so that you can remember it at a second later, a minute later, an hour later, maybe a day later, maybe a year later. this is an extraordinary story and it's going to be kind of complicated. so what i want to do is i want to sum up the big themes, the punchlines of these lectures that i want you today to attend to and keep in mind. so we're going to talk about perception in this lecture and we'll learn that problem of perception is hard and you will see why it's hard. and that a successful perception in order to make sense of the world, involves making educated guesses about the world. these aren't guesses that you explicitly say, i'm guessing this or i'm guessing that, but they're unconscious guesses, they're guesses that your visual system makes. then we move to attention and there's the obvious which is we attend to some things and not others but there's the really interesting that we miss a surprising amount of what happens in the world. then there is memory, and we'll learn there's many types of memory. we will learn that the key to memorization is organization understanding. and you'll learn that can't trust some of your memories. some of the things in your head that you're most confident of, that you most believe, probably never happen. now, we'll talk about other things as well, but these are going to be the main themes of the following two lectures.
now, the problem perception may not seem very hard. there are trees, and people, and rocks, and planets, and monkeys in the world and you see them and you know what they are. it's not immediately obvious that this is such a difficult problem. there's a story and i'm not sure it's true, but there's a story of a very famous ai researcher, artificial intelligence researcher in the 60s, who set himself the project of building a robot. he worked on his most complicated part, but of course, the robot to make its way through the world had to be able to see and identify objects. so, the story goes that he assigned a graduate student this problem, as a summer project. i think do for next few months, figuring how we recognize things. psychologists love this story, because it nicely expresses how simple the problem of perception looks, but how hard it actually is. so, if the story is true, the graduate student never really did finished the project. in fact, we've been working along the project of object recognition in computers and artificial intelligence for many years and only recently are we seeing some progress. so, i used to be able to say, when i gave this lecture about five, 10 years ago that, there's no machine that comes close to what humans can do regarding recognizing things. machines are getting better and better and i have a feeling that one day i'll give this lecture and i can't say it anymore. one day it'll be machines from facebook or google that really can recognize objects at the ability of a person. but they aren't there yet. so, if you wanted these people who thinks that object perception is easy, you might have a conception of something like this, where what happens is, you see the world through your eyes and then you're sitting in your head and your skull looking at some sort of computer screen that indicates the world as it is. this is, for instance, the depiction in a terminator movie, where you see the world through his eyes and what you see is the world annotated it with some symbols and some figures, but basically, the world. but of course, that can't solve the problem. that just pushes the question back, because now the world has been encapsulated into a screen, a computer screen, but how do you recognize things on the computer screen? you've solved nothing. so, the better way to think about perception is, well, you have the eye, which is a fleshy gui sort of thing. then, you have the retina and light hits the retina and the retina is a bunch of nerve cells and these nerve cells fire and they fire at some stimulus and not others. then, so you get is, basically the equivalent of this, an array of numbers, numbers corresponding with the intensity of firing, where one number is fire, fire, fire and another fire, fire, fire, fire, fire. now, you have an array of numbers, and then the problem of perception is, out of this array of numbers, this shifting array of numbers, you have to extract objects and people, where people are, what they're doing, what things are shape, what colors things are, what depth things are and so on. now, you can sort of see why this is difficult. one way to imagine this is that, it's a certain mathematical problem, your array is a two-dimensional array that's all that's going on in your eye. you need to infer a three-dimensional world, which is what we got there, what you think about from a two-dimensional information and it's mathematically impossible to do this with certainty. it's like backwards multiplying. when given a compound number, you can't easily determined the unique numbers that gave rise to it, because there are multiple numbers consistent with that compound number. similarly, for the world, imagine most of your retina is silent, nothing's firing, but there's neurons firing that corresponds to a shape and the shape is this irregular polygon you see here. so, what's in the world? well, you don't know. for instance, you don't know how far away it is. the regular polygon to fill up this amount of the space in your brain, can be right next to you. it could be floating in space a foot away from you, or it could be a million miles away. so, think about the moon. the moon, you looking at a full moon in the sky, takes up some circular space on your eye. how do you know that it's not a foot away, or 10 feet away, or a million miles away? nothing in information and eye per se tells you. you also don't know what shape this is. so, maybe it's the shape that you see it as irregular polygon, or maybe it's a square that's been tilted back. so, how do you tell? for everything you see, there's an indefinite number of possibilities as to the actual real-world things give rise to it. i'll give you real examples of this coming up and i want to do it in terms of color, actually brightness, in terms of objects and object recognition and in terms of depth. for each of these, i'll suggest that we have unconscious assumptions in the head about how the world works, that helps us take these indefinite number of interpretations and narrow it down to get to the right one.
so, how do you tell a lump of coal from a snowball. you might think this is obvious, the lump of coal among other things. there's differences in texture and so on, but a lump of coal is black, a snowball is bright white because your eye can tell the difference in the intensity of light. it should be easy, the black lump of coal causes less neural firings, less firing in response to light than a white lump of snow. but it turns out this can't be right. there's more to perceiving the brightness of an object than the amount of light that hits it. rather, we're sensitive to the context in which the object is in. there's all sorts of demonstrations of it. here's my favorite. so, look at these two squares here, the ones with the arrows pointed at them. you might think one of them, the one on the left looks light and the one on the right looks dark. and that's true. under neutral circumstances, in fact they would be light and dark. but here's the thing, they're really the same color on the screen. what happens is, the one on the left is in shadow. since shadows make surfaces darker, your brain compensates and lights it up. since lights make things brighter, your mind compensates and darkens it. so, just to prove this to you, what if you took away all of the external cues? so, lets start taking things away, and you will see they're actually the same color. this bias in construing the color of things comes naturally to us. if i walk around the stage, and all of a sudden i fall into shadow, you don't scream, "oh my gosh professor bloom is changing color. how remarkable." i don't change color at all to you. rather, although, i might look less light, when i step into shadow, your brain automatically compensates for this. it's these unconscious acts of compensation that causes us to see and understand the world. in particular, in the case we're looking at, there's a simple assumption. shadows make surfaces darker. so, if a surface is in shadow, we would assume that it's lighter than it looks, and we actually see it as lighter.
as a second example, consider the problem of segmenting the world that we see into distinct objects. so, when you see something like this, you don't see an undifferentiated blob of shapes and colors, rather you see different objects that stand in relationship with one another. you might see a man, a house, a couple of birds. how did we do this? what are the cues that generate the distinctions that segment one object from another? well, this was a great topic of study by psychologists many decades ago, the gestalt psychologists. the gestalt psychologists proposed principles that lead us to segment one thing from another. so, one example of such a principle is proximity. things that are close together relative to other things tend to be seen as distinct. so, you would naturally see this, there's an indefinite number of ways you could in principle break up these circles. but the natural temptation set us three groups, and we segment these into three groups because the objects naturally cluster together as being close in space, or this. again there's also two ways you might break this up, but you're naturally prone to break this up into two things, in fact, you might even see this as two objects maybe one jutting into another or one lying on top of another. the objects gets segmented into two because there are distinct patterns. so, here it's similarity that causes you to divide one thing from another. there's closure. so, one natural way to to see this is as a square laying on top of the circle. why? because the square is closes up, it's a natural form. so, while it's logically possible to see the circle as broken up with adjusting edge on the top left corner, that's not how you normally do it, enormously as one object on top of another. similarly, there's good continuation. so, the simplest continuation of these lines has a leading to b and c leading to d. there's nothing logically round though, saying here are two complicated lines, one goes from a to c and other one goes from d to b, it's just not natural. we make the simplest continuation, it is common movement. you would naturally see these to clusters as two different groups. finally, good form. so, imagine you see the objects on the far left, you see it's a plus side, it's a natural sign, there's a natural symmetry to it, there is clean right angles and so on. what is this? well that could be a single thing too, it could be like a board with another board sticking into it and built as a single thing, or just a single carving of a certain unusual shape, but for that case, you'd be more likely to see it as two things. say one piece of wood on top of another piece of wood, and this is because the lack of good form causes you to see things that way. if you go back to this original picture as an exercise, you could see how clues like similarity proximity and like could help you distinguish different things from other things. so, for instance, the walkway that the man is walking on, the patterns on the walkway are similar, and this is why you might see the whole walkway as a single distinct thing separate from the man and separate from the house. now, sometimes these principles can lead to some clever illusions, and what's interesting is you probably see a triangle in the middle a light triangle. it turns out that triangle is an illusion. the pac-man on the side are consistent with a triangle coming out of it, and so your mind find this such a beautiful natural simple form, it fills it in creating an object where none exists, and here's another case with a square. to see that as an illusion to see that there's really no lighted square in the middle of it, if the pac-man go away, the impression in the square goes away too.
the third case study of how we understand the world, how we make an inference about a three dimensional world from a two dimensional array, is a case of depth. so you don't see all of these figures as lying along the same plane. you see, for instance, the man in front of the house. and it's an interesting question, how you do this. what cues your mind uses to figure out the relative locations of things in space. for more dramatic illustration, you could look at this and this is still, it's a two dimensional figure. just on a two dimension array, but it doesn't look two dimensional. things are happening to it that give you the illusion of a three dimensional thing. so what's going? well, there are different answers. one answer is the size of things. so this cartoon illustrates that, if you see something that really takes the size of your thumb, and it's a person, most likely it's not a tiny person floating in the air in front of you. rather, it's a person at a distance. and so, knowing the rough size of things can help you infer how far away they are. then, there's interposition. so go back to this picture. the man is in front of the house because the man interrupts the house itself. in another words, you can fully see the man, but the house is blocked by the man. and so, duh, the man is in front of the house. and as i walk along the stage, and walk back and forth, i change in size, but you know i'm not actually changing in size. so you infer that i'm moving away from you or close to you. and as i walk in front of something, you don't assume that my body adopts some weird shape, or i'm half object, half person. but rather you assume that i am moving behind that object. then, there's other more subtle cues that psychologists have studied. so consider these two illusions. this is the mueller lyer illusion. and what's cool is, if you're like most people, you will see the line on top as longer than the line on the bottom, even though they aren't. it's an illusion created by the context in which the lines are shown. and so, what can we say about this? well, the standard explanation, here, is that the top horizontal line for the mller lyer illusion looks longer because we infer that it's further away. the things on the side lead us to infer that it's from a distance because it seems to be pushed away from us. and so, because it's a distance, it occupies x space on our retina, but we assume since it's further away it must really be bigger than x. and so, in our minds, just as we adjust to the colors of objects in shadow, we adjust our perception to size of objects due to distance cues. similarly, the inward pointing line looks closer. and if something seems to be closer, we think it's smaller. relative to the same amount of retinal coverage for something that we think is bigger. or is another case, the ponzo illusion is the same thing. because of the converging lines, you get the impression that the line on top is further away. and since it actually takes the same amount of space on your eye as the line on the bottom, you then infer that it must be bigger. and none of this is conscious. this goes back to the rules of language. we're talking about all these subtle rules of language. where you understand the pig is eager to eat is different from the pig is easy to eat. and you understand it immediately. but you can't articulate why. and the same with the cues. immediately parts of your understanding of scenes guide you to think that the top line is longer than the bottom line, but you can't say why. and this is why psychology is often so interesting. and that's why the study of vision is in some regards similar to study of language. in that, they both explore mental mechanisms that work with extraordinary speed, unconsciously, to hear some understanding of the world. and i will end with another example on that. in fact, one of my favorite examples. these are the shepard tables developed by roger shepard. these look like different tables. and if you just show these to people, and you ask them something like, which would be easier to get through a door if you have a thin door? people would say the one on the left, they look like very different tables. but this is an illusion set up by cues of depth perception and i'm going to show you this is an illusion in this way, if you think i'm doing some trickery. rectangle here, [sound] covering the table on the left, and now let's just move it. [sound] and as you can see, they match. and based on what you know about depth perception, thinking about the muller lyer illusions and the ponzo illusions. thinking about the cues to depth, i'll leave it as a take home exercise to explain why that shepherds tables work so well. and that is where i am going to end our discussion of perception, through examples of these unconscious and lightning fast cues, beliefs about how the world works that can create illusions in the context of a psychology experiment. but in real life allow us to understand the physical world so well.
so, the perceptual processes that we've discussed so far, causes to see this two dimensional array as a person standing in front of a house. more generally, our perceptual abilities let us segment the world into objects, space into things like people and trees and houses, and let them understand where they stand in relationship to each other. where they stand in depth, giving rise to three dimensional understanding, out from a two dimensional world. now, this is just part of the story, and the whole story which we're going to discuss through the end of this lecture, and the next lecture, is how it gets all the way from the world, all the way into long-term memory. this is a complicated diagram, and you don't have to think about it too long. but what's worth knowing is that there are three stages. there's sensory memory, which is basically what you see. what appears to your senses. then there's working memory, also known as short-term memory, also associated with consciousness. that's what you experience for a brief period of time. then there's long-term memory, what you carry away with you. if you know your name? if you know the city were born in? if you know my name? it's all long-term memory, it's stuff stored in. what i want to focus on for this lecture, is how things get from sensory memory into working memory, and the answer is attention. when you attend to things, when you focus the spotlight of attention onto things, it causes you to remember them and think about them. now, it turns out that there are some surprising facts about attention. attention gets information from sensory memory to working memory to consciousness, but there's lot of things we don't attend to. a lot of what goes on in a world, we're unaware of. sometimes attention is effortless. sometimes things just jump out at us, and capture our attention automatically. so, i'll give a demonstration. i'm going to show you a slide, and i want you to tell me when a green x shows up. if you're sitting by yourself just shout, "got it." we're looking for something green. go. now, if you're like most people this was pretty instantaneous. now, next one, when an o comes up just shout, "got it." same deal, you saw it right away. psychologists say it this is a parallel process because you didn't have to go through each item until you find it, it just popped out at you. but sometimes attention requires work and effort. so, i wanted to tell me when you see a red o. go. now i bet it took longer. some of you by good fortune are incredible mental speed noticed it right away, others are probably still struggling to find it. but, the idea here is that to find a red o requires serial processing, and what this means is you have to effort-fully go item by item, until you find it. distractions like where's waldo, which involve looking at sheets of paper where something is hidden, require this search technique, for that red o to get into your mind you have to take the time to search for it. now, sometimes attention is involuntary, you can't help but attend. the most obvious example is spoken language. so, if i'm sitting next to you, and i'm talking you can't help but listen to what i'm saying. i could be telling you the most boring story in the world, i could be telling it over my phone not to you at all, but if there's no other distractions you can't help but listen, you can't shut your ears. when you could literally sticky fingers in your ears, but barring that my talking will attract your attention, and capture it. here's another case this is a classic discovery in psychology known as the stroop effect. it's very simple. we show you a list of colors, and your task is to name the colors. so, you might see this, and you say, "you have to name as fast as possible red, green, blue, black, green, blue and so on." easy as pie. now, let's give the colors, let's make the colors words remember, you're not supposed to read the words, just name the colors. well it's also easy, green, red, blue, black, blue, red, but now and here's what a cool stroop effect comes in. imagine the word say different things than the colors. so, imagine you have to do as quickly as possible. blue, green, red, green, black, slower. it is definitely slower why, because if you know how to read english. you can't help but read english. so, you know you suppose look at the color of letters for the first one which is blue, but you can't help but also read the word red, and red jumps out at you. this just shows how sometimes things out of your control can capture your attention, and derail a mental process. i would just tell you by the way that you can use the stroop effect to detect russian spies. so, there's a tv show that americans, a lovely tv show involving sympathetic russian spies, and they know russian. now, suppose somebody came up to you and said, "i don't speak any russian, i don't read any russian. is there anyway you could find out, whether they did well there is there is the stroop effect. so, i can give this to you, and say name the colors and if you're not a russian speaker, you would say, "yellow blue," but if you were russian speaker it would slow you down, because it so happens according to google translate. the first word is the russian word for blue, and the second word is a russian word for yellow, and if you read russian that trip you up. attention also applies in the real world, now i'll just show you some clips of some everyday demos. this was developed by some lovely experiments done at cornell about a decade ago. showing that in everyday life when you're not paying attention to things, you don't notice things. "excuse me, do you know how get to trinity church from here. yeah, you see that church down there. yes straight through there. then may keep you. sorry, which way. see that church that is down there. yes. stay on that it reaches on fifth broadway, and then you walk down two or three blocks and trinity church is in over by the. let me walk with you in that direction. excuse me do you know where trinity church is do you. might be wall street in broadway. okay. we are down here somewhere aren't we. yes. sorry. if you keep going that way all the way and then you go. thanks very much. that seemed almost too easy, so later on i see how far i can take it. excuse me do you know where trinity church is. yes. great. where are we on here? we are right here. excuse. go on. we're on brooklyn bridge, you want cross over there go down broadway you will be right there. so, the big themes here for perception, involving the difficulty of perception, and a accessible perception involves educated guesses, about the world, and the theme about attention is, we attend to somethings and not others, and we miss a surprising amount of what happens in the world. in the next lecture, we're going to turn to that the final third of this trilogy and talk about memory.
this lecture is on memory, and we're continuing the journey now started in the previous lecture. going from the world, from our perception of the world, to attention, and now, through memory. so you've seen something, you've attended to it, and now it gets into your head. memory is complicated. when you imagine somebody losing their memory, you might think of jason bourne traveling through europe, having adventures but not knowing about his past. you don't think of somebody in diapers lying on the floor, unable to move. yet, memory underlies everything we know, not just our autobiography. so, when we imagine somebody losing their memory, we often imagine just autobiographical memory, memory of the self. but of course, this is just one part of what memory is. now, there are certain distinctions we should keep in mind when we talk about memory. one is the distinction between implicit memory and explicit memory. explicit memory is what you consciously know; you know your name, you know the capital of canada, you know what you had for breakfast this morning. while implicit memory is stuff that you may not be conscious of. you might, for instance, forget that you've ever been to a place, but at some level, know your way around. there may be a word that is unfamiliar to you consciously, but at gut level, you know what it means. there is a distinction between semantic memory and episodic memory. semantic memory are facts. again, the capital of canada. while episodic memory is about episodes of your life. when we talk about memory, we talk about encoding, storage, and retrieval. encoding is what happens to get information into your head, storage is keeping it in your head, and retrieval is getting out of your head. we talk about recall versus recognition. these are two different ways to tap memory. recall is freely recounting what you've experienced. so, if i asked you what i was wearing during my last lecture, if you were to answer, that would be recall. while recognition is from a set of options, which one is it. so if i was to show you five pictures of what i was wearing last lecture, which is kind of a strange example because i'm an avatar. but nonetheless, if you picked the right outfit, you'd be succeeding at recognition. if you want to think of it this way, recall is more a short answer exam or an essay exam while recognition is more multiple choice. finally, there is the distinction between sensory memory, short term memory and long term memory.
so, this is quite a famous diagram capturing one conception of how information travels through your head. so, you start off with sensory input what you see, what you hear, what you feel, and then it ends up in sensory memory, and sensory memory is a very short-term storage. if there's a flash of lightning, and you close your eyes and there's an afterimage, that's a form of sensory memory. if i say something to you and you hold the last words in your head, that sensory memory too, and sometimes if somebody says to you. "well you're not listening to me," and then you can kind of reach back and parrot back what they said even if you really weren't listening to them, because some of this acoustic sensory memory exist. what you attend to ends up in your short-term memory or your working memory. this is of course short-term memory that is not somehow rehearsed or understood, gets quickly lost. you can hold things in short-term memory through what's called maidens rehearsal. so, if i give you a phone number, 5206889056, you can hold it in your head 5206689056889056, and you could walk around holding it in your head like that. some of the stuff then goes on to long-term memory, and long-term memory is storage for a long duration. the connection between working memory, short-term memory and long-term memory goes both ways. stuff from short-term memory could end up in long-term memory, and stuff that's in long-term memory could end backup into working memory. to some extent, many psychologists identify working memory with consciousness. so, working memory is your experience of what things are, of how the world works. now the most obvious way in which long-term memory and short-term memory differ is their storage. long-term memory has virtually unlimited storage. every word you know the meaning of in every language you understand is in long-term memory, all of these faces you recognize, every story, every joke, the plot of every tv program all of the various episodes in your life are all stored in long-term memory. it has to have a limit because long-term memory as part of your finite rein, and finite things have a limit, but people will never reach that limit. short-term memory in contrast has a very limited storage capacity. so, here it goes don't cheat, i'm going to give you a list of numbers 14, 59, 11, 109, 43, 58, 98, 487, 25, 389, 54, 16. so, try to remember them. you could try to rehearse it in your head frantically repeating the numbers, but it's actually too long to do so, and unless you somehow incorporate this into your long-term memory, you're going to lose it, it's going to slip away. in fact, the storage of short-term memory has been described by george miller as seven plus or minus two, that's sometimes called the magic number, which means it ranges from five to nine depending on the person, and depending on the situation. now, a perfectly good question at this point is seven plus one minus two, what? the answer is chunks, and chunks are basic memory units. your knowledge of what counts as a unit, what makes a single thing determines how many chunks, something, a display or a list can break down into. you will get more efficient at packing information into chunks as a result of learning. so, take this example, suppose you don't know anything about french and you get the string of letters, l-a-m-a-i-s-o-n. well, if you just try to remember each letter separately, that's eight chunks and you're pushing the limits of short-term memory. another handy you could break it up into four english words, la-ma-is-on, let's pretend la and ma are english words, now it's four chunks. but if you know french, it's la maison, the house, and now it is a single chunk. in general, there's a lot of evidence suggesting that people's memory gets better as they become experts. football coaches have an excellent memory for football diagrams, architects for logical floor plans, and chess players for chess patterns. so, if you don't know anything about chess and i show you this, it's impossible to memorize, it's a bunch of figures in an arbitrary location, but if you do know chess and the pieces fall into a logical sensible configuration, may be this is the 15th mover the fibonacci attack. i just made that up, i don't know anything about chess. but if it makes sense to you, you could glance at this and memorize it, not because your short-term memory is more powerful in general than a non chess expert, but rather because you break this down into a single chunk. so, how much you store into your consciousness critically depends on your knowledge.
so, how do you get things into long-term memory? this is something you're trying to do right now, if you're trying to study from this course, you're trying to get things into your head so that they stay in your head. we have some answers to this. we know rehearsal is not enough. repeating it in your head isn't enough. you need something else. one of the ways to get stuff into memory is what's called a depth of processing. what this means is, the deeper you think about something, the more sense you try to add to it, the easier it is to remember. there is a very clever very simple study that illustrates this. you ask people, you give them a string of 48 words, and you ask them different questions about the words. so, i had no idea this is a memory test at all. so, one group might be told, press the button if the word that you see on the screen is written in capitals. a second group is told, press the button, the word is good rhyme with train, and the third group is told, press a button if it would fit into the sentence, the girl placed the blank on the table. so, they do this and then as a surprise, they get a memory test, and it turns out that the sort of way they thought about the word influences their subsequent memory of it. the people who just looked at the word look like remembered at least the sound in between but the meaning they remembered at most. this suggests that, when you try to understand the meaning of a word, maybe you think about it harder or maybe make more connections to it, and this will help you remember it later. a second way related to this as a second way to remember things, is through mnemonics. through basically, sort of tricks that make a word bigger, that give it more connections. so, you might turn it into a rhyme. you might say if you want to know what the hippocampus does a certain part of the brain, you may say, the way i find my way through campus, is through what i store in my hippocampus. its not the best rhyme but, now probably for the rest of your life, you'll know that hippocampus helps you remember where things are. or you might use visual imagery. so, this is something which has been known through the course of history, that by creating vivid images, things become more memorable. so, if you're lucky enough to have to remember the name of somebody named mr. fish, if you imagine a fish sticking out of his head, that might really help you remember his name later on, and people like like joshua foer, who gave a wonderful ted talk on how we can use these memory tricks to store amounts of information in your head have won competitions involving astonishing feats of memory. like taking 52 playing cards, rifling through them quickly and then remembering each and every one of them in order and so, if you go to the ted talk you could see how that all works. now, to remember anything of any depth though, it's more than tricks. really it helps a lot to understand the material. i'll give you an example. i'm going to read you a passage and in fact you'll see it on the screen here. a newspaper is better than a magazine. a seashore is a better place than the street. at first it is better to run than to walk. you may have to try several times but it takes some skill, but it's easy to learn, even young children can enjoy it. once successful complications are minimal. birds seldom get too close. rain, however, soaks in very fast. too many people doing the same thing can also cause problems. one needs lots of room. if there are no complications it can be very peaceful. a rock will serve as an anchor. if things break loose from it however, you will not get a second chance. this is very difficult to remember, because each sentence seems unrelated to the other sentences, and it seems like gibberish. but now, you had exactly the same passage but i tell you this paragraph is about flying a kite. now look over it again and you'll see it's just a lot easier to remember. it's a lot easier to remember because you understand it. i think there's a general moral here which is to understand things, lead you to remember them. so going through say a course like this, you should struggle to make sense of things. you should actively engage in ideas and then as a byproduct of this, they're going to stick in your head for longer.
we've talked about how to get information into memory. now, consider how we get information out of memory. how do you remember things? one answer is retrieval cues. so cues can bring things back. if i have to go to a doctor, if i have a doctors appointment and i forgot about it, and i walked by and i see some pills, that they remind me. you could be cute and by all sorts of things, there's no joke. a rabbi is talking to his friend priest and says, "no. i can't find my bicycle anywhere, i think somebody stole it, i think somebody from my congregation stole it." and the priest says, "i have a good idea. why don't you give your sermon next week on the ten commandments and then when you get to thou shall not steal, people will hear you, they'll now feel bad, and then they'll tell you where your bicycle is?" so they meet the next little while later and the rabbi has his bicycle and the priest, "ah, did you do my my trick? did it work? " and the rabbi says, "well, it sort of worked. i gave my sermon on the ten commandments and then, when i got to thou shall not commit adultery, i remembered where my bicycle was." so retrieval queues work. a second way, fact about remembering things, it's what's called the compatibility principle. it's also called context-dependent memories, mistake dependent memory. and the idea is, that maybe in part because of cues, you remember things better when you have to recover them in the same context in which you learnt them. and this was illustrated by a quite cool experiment, where they get people, i think, they're scuba divers to either learn new words on a boat or whether underwater. and then they test them on their knowledge of the words, when either on a boat or underwater and it turns out that there's the compatibility principle at work. if you learnt them on a boat, you remember them better on a boat. if you learnt them underwater, you remember them better underwater. and this applies not just to physical states but to psychological states, so if you learn something when you're depressed, it might come to mind easier when you're depressed. if you learnt something while you're a little bit drunk, it may come to mind easier when you're a little bit drunk. finally, they're searching strategies. so in one study, they asked people to remember their high school classmates from many years ago or even 20 years ago and you could check, if they are right by checking that the yearbook, so you have some certain objective source to determine whether or not people are right or wrong. and when you forces people to remember, they don't come up with many names. but then you could ask them to search, like a physical search in different ways, you say, "well, what classes were you in? what clubs? what teams? remember any parties you went to? where you neighbors with any of the kids in your school? any of kids from different countries? what about meals? what about adventurers, arguments, romances?" and what you discover is, the more you work on it, the more you explore things from different ends, from different angles, the more you'll remember. it's as if memories leave tendrils and if you grab hold of one of the tendrils, you can trace your way back to the source. and you could try to do this yourself, in the last lecture you saw a picture of a man and a house and i showed it to you i think more than once. how much can you remember of it? and what i would suggest is, that if you try right away, you just list, "oh, i remember this and that." and you give up, you're giving up too soon. if you can have explored different ways of thinking about a different possibilities, different things that could be in the picture, sooner or later, you'll know more and more. memory, as we'll see it's not ever like a photograph or a video, it's never exact, it's always reconstructed. and sometimes when you do this sort of searching, you run the risk of creating false memories which we'll discuss very soon. but still, searching strategies can really help you recover memories that you had believed to be lost.
okay. now, let's talk about forgetting. one of the most obvious facts about memory is that we forget things over time, memory fades, memory goes away. there's different reasons why this could happen. one is simple, which is memories are physical things, so they decay. the physical structures in the brain, the physical patterns of atoms and molecules, and they fade. they just fade over time. there was a study where psychologists taught fish something. you could really teach fish things. then, gently heated up the temperature of the tank. the higher they heated it, still keeping the fish safe. the more forgetting there was because the heat caused the memory's molecular structures to dissolve a little bit faster. another reason why you forget things over time is interference, so new things come in. i teach you the phone number 6889056, but then you hear other numbers 4328166, 2800027. these other numbers mess up your memory of the first number. now, this only works with similar material. so, if i teach you a phone number 6889056 and then teach you some real cool dance moves, that won't have an influence but similar sorts of things will overlay upon previous memories. finally, there's changes of retrieval cues. typically, as time goes by, your cues change. you move houses, you move workplaces, the objects around you are different, and all of that makes memories that are connected to the previous cues more likely to fade. i don't think this is a major cause, but it has some effect. all of these explain to some extent, childhood amnesia, which is when we don't typically remember what happened before roughly the age of two or three. part of it is just there's been a lot of time, part of it is interference, and part of it is changing retrieval cues. there's also other factors that are worth discussing. it might be for instance that learning of a language transforms how your memory works. so, it's difficult to remember a time before you had language. it's also possible that certain structures of the brain mature and that leads to a change in memory. childhood amnesia is maybe the most dramatic case of everyday forgetting. then, there's cases of forgetting through brain damage. a lot of this illustrated in a series of excellent movies like eternal sunshine of spotless mind, that again the bourne identity, and spellbound. movies are fascinated with people who get popped on the head and get amnesia. there's two very different sorts of amnesia that are interestingly distinct. one is retrograde amnesia. this is the standard movie amnesia, where you lose your memory for some period of time prior to your accident or a stroke, trauma, or whatever. this is jason bourne amnesia, this is who am i, where am i, i don't remember my name, amnesia. then, there's anterograde amnesia. an anterograde amnesia is when you lose the capacity to form new memories. i want to now show you a movie clip of a particular case of amnesia, a very dramatic case of amnesia. this is clive wearing, he's world-renowned choir director and musical arranger, and he suffered brain damage following viral encephalitis, which destroyed large areas of his brain, both temporal lobes, his entire hippocampus, and most of his left frontal lobes. he's lost a lot of memories of his past, but he also lost the ability to form new memories. so, he's constantly being reborn as this clip dramatically portrays. [inaudible]. one of the things that characterizes clive's day is that, he continually makes entries in his diary. i think he makes entries in his diary rather than keeps the diary because in fact, he's not keeping the diary. he is in a compulsion to record the momentous event of waking up because clive's perception of his own condition is that because he has no memory whatsoever up to the currents 10, 20 seconds or maybe half a minute, depending on whether they've been distractive, any proactive interference and the whole, his conscious working span memory is that's current minute. everything else behind the minute is blank. everything until now is unknown and it's void. he uses the analogy of feeling as if he has just woken up. he says it's like just waking up for the first time. it's like just becoming conscious. it's as if i had been unconscious for however many years. because for him, it is momentous, he has to write it down and he has to write it down in any available surface. if the diary is in front of him, he will write it down there. he will record the time, 10:50 a.m. awake first time, and then he looks we at the previous entry, which was 10:48 a.m. awake first time and he says, "no. i was awake then, that wasn't me. that wasn't proper awakeness. this is the first real awakeness. " so, he goes through the diary scoring out previous entries and underlining the current new entry because this now is the real awakeness, all the previous awakenesses are unknown to me. i've nothing to say about it. it's just like that. no thought of any kind of dreams, no [inaudible]. no thoughts, nothing. no dreams. nothing at all. any question you have, it's answer, i don't know. there's nothing to say. no dreams. no psycheness. [inaudible] nothing at all. no thoughts. nothing. what is it right now? i can see. first time. first time i had any sign of life. so, you're feeling normal now? yes. actually i just sat down now. you don't remember sitting down? no. [inaudible]. there has been a fascinating discovery concerning anterograde amnesia, which tells us about different types of memory. what's interesting is, that it used to be thought that few of these amnesia simply can't form new memories. but actually, what they can't form is new explicit memories. they can form new implicit memories and in particular, new skills. what you see here is a standard difficult task, where you have to draw a certain figure while looking in the mirror and this is tough. this is tough, but normal people get better with practice. what's really cool is that individuals with amnesia, get better with practice, suggesting that they can form new memories. learning is nothing more than a formation of a new memory, but they don't form explicit new memories. they learn new things, but they don't know that they learned new things. a person like hm, who was a famous patient, might do this task over and over again and get really good at it and each time you bring him to task he'll say, "oh, i've never seen that before. tell me how to do it. " but unbeknownst to him, his memories are being formed. this tells us something about amnesia, but it also tells us something about the rest of us, that there are two separate memory systems at least: one for explicit memory, one for implicit memory. i'd be a miss if i didn't add that there are two movies, one of a terrible movie 50 first dates and one an extraordinarily interesting movie memento. we'll just talk about memento here, where the distinction between explicit memory and implicit memory is absolutely central to the plot in a movie. if you want to learn about memory and some extraordinary aspects of it, i could think of no better recommendation than seeing the movie memento.
i want to end with what i think is the most surprising and perhaps controversial aspect of the study of memory. which is how we often get things wrong, and how our memories can be distorted and shaped by factors we're unaware o. and how we're often very confident about memories, about things that didn't really happen. and there's many ways in which we can get false memories. one is simply expectations. our beliefs about what should happen, what typically happen will shape our memories of what happens. people have done studies where they tell people stories for instance about somebody who goes to a dentist office or goes has a meal in a restaurant. and then later asked them what they remember of the story. and what you often find is that they tend to fill in the details that typically occur even though they didn't. so the story might not mention paying the bill. but somebody later will confidently remember that they've been told a person paid the bill because they put in that fact. studies of eye witness testimony, and here the great work of a psychologist elizabeth loftus plays a role. have found that leading questions will shape how you remember a scene. so for instance, if you ask people questions like did you see the broken headlight versus did you see a broken headlight? later on, they're more likely to remember that there was a broken headlight if they heard did you see the broken headlight? because presupposes a broken headlight, so they stick it into their memory. if you ask them questions like, did you see the children getting into school bus? later on just asking that question makes them much more likely to remember school bus in the film. or given a scene where they're asked, how fast were the cars going when they hit each other, versus how fast were the cars going when they smashed into each other? [noise] a week later when asked, did you see broken glass? they're more likely to say yes if they were given the word smashed because their questions after the event shape their memory of the event. another domain where false memories apply concerns hypnosis. so there's some people who try to do what's called hypnotic regression. where you get people to a hypnotic state and ask them to go back and remember something from their past. a license plates seen at the crime scene or their sixth birthday, and what happens here is there's no magic. it's not as if where the mind is a video recorder and we're scanning back to get to the truth as you might seen in some movies. instead, what really happens is people really try hard to remember, but if they can't, they'll make it up. what hypnosis does is make people cooperative. and the cooperation will often manifest itself into creating and making up memories that seem true in order to satisfy the questioners. there's been a lot of debate about repressed memories, where some people have argued that adults do report memories of traumatic childhood abuse, often sexual abuse. and these are said to be accurate, repressed, which means there was a long period where the person just forgot about them. and elicited through work with a therapist often using hypnosis. and actually just to add repressed is more than just forgetting, it is that if something is sufficiently unpleasant, you might wipe it from memory at least temporarily or you might suppress it, repress it. now there's a lot of debate about that. there's a lot of debate over whether such a thing really exists. whether there's such a thing as a physiological mechanism to block your access to a memory that's sufficiently horrible. also, regardless of what you think about that and i think most psychologists are very skeptical about repression. it is pretty clear that you can create false memories, even false memories of dramatic and traumatic events through discussion, through exercises where you think back, where you try to reconstruct things. often through interaction with a therapist where a therapist is perfectly well-meaning. and believes that he or she is sort of recovering a memory from the past, but in reality is creating one. finally, there are flashbulb memories. depending on your age, you might well remember, if you're american or actually from anywhere, where you were on september 11, 2001. and many people it was a very dramatic event, a terrorist attack in new york. and people often have these very vivid, very powerful memories, but it turns out these memories are actually not particularly accurate. in fact, memories of significant scenes are more vulnerable to distortions because you talk about them. you talk about them with other people, you recount the story. and what happens over time is, you no longer remember what really happened rather, you remember the story. so, to bring this to a close, in our previous couple of lectures, we've talked about perception attention memory, and we've talked about a lot. but i just want to hit the main points, which is perception is hard. and succeeding at perception involves educated and unconscious guesses about the world. for attention we attend to some things and not others which you already know, or maybe you didn't know is you miss a surprising amount of what happens in the world. and finally, i think there are three main morals of this memory lecture. there are many types of memory, the key to memory is organization and understanding, and finally, you can't trust some of your memories.
hi, i'm paul bloom, and i'm delighted to welcome you to introduction to psychology. i've been here at yale for about 20 years, and just about every year, i teach intro psych. i teach it to hundreds of undergraduates. it is one of my favorite courses to teach. but i'm particularly thrilled to be able now to present the material of intro psych to a broader audience. now, there's all different ways you could take this course. nobody would blame you if you decide to just dive in, look at electron freud, or about mistakes and memory, or about depression. electrodes can be listened to or watched out of order. but what i would suggest if you can is treat it like a course. sit with your laptop in front of you with a cup of strong coffee and a cigar, take notes, go through it bit by bit in order in which it's given, take the exams. exams are not meant to be difficult, but they are meant to sort of tap your understanding of the material as you go through it. once you've done that, you could be said to have taken a course on intro psych. then, if you want to move it up one level, you can do the associated readings. the readings are online. they're from an excellent textbook. they're free. they're written clearly. if you do lectures and you do the readings, then you can legitimately say you took intro to psych and you'll have a tremendous background. the course covers every important aspect of the science of the mind. i start off with the brain asking the question of how this physical lump of me gives rise to mental life. we talk about freud and skinner looking at the historical foundations of psychology. we talk about how children develop including some research i've done on that building over there. we talk about how we learn to speak. we move to perception how we see the world, how we remember the world, how we attend to the world. we target the emotions, love, lust, anger, kindness, and hatred. we explore how we interact socially, how prejudices form, what we like about one another. we'll talk about differences, how we're different, why we're different, what this means for us, and we'll talk about clinical disorders like depression and anxiety. what disorders many of you suffer from and what causes them and what can cure them, and we'll end with an overview about happiness. what the scientific study of psychology tells us about how to be happy. i'm admittedly biased, but i think psychology is most interesting topic around. so, i'm delighted to have you take this course.
this is a lecture, a little bit longer than usual, on the emotions. one reason why it's a little bit longer than unusual is that i'm going to put the study of emotions in a broader context and use it as a way to introduce some ideas about evolution, how it works, and why it's relevant to psychology. so, we began the course by talking about one of the foundations of modern psychology, which is that the brain is the origin of mental life. we call this the astonishing hypothesis, borrowing from the title of francis crick. it really is astonishing and violates all sorts of common sense. but this doctrine, also known as the doctrine of physicalism, is now universally agreed. what i want to do now is bring in a second radical idea, one that pairs nicely with the first. this has to do with where the brain comes from. this is what daniel dennett has coined darwin's dangerous idea, and what he's talking about is natural selection. now, for as long as there have been people, we've been interested in evolution of complex things. we've been interested in where complex things come from, and in particular, complex things like us, like humans, and other animals, and plants, the things of nature. there's a common explanation for this that many people have found compelling through history. it's nicely summed up by the brilliant theologian and doctor, william paley. so, paley writes, "in crossing a heath, suppose i pitched my foot against a stone, and were asked how the stone came to be there: i might possibly answer, that, for any thing i knew to the contrary, it had lain there forever; nor would it perhaps be very easy to show the absurdity of this answer. but suppose i had found a watch upon the ground, and it should be inquired how the watch happened to be in that place; i should hardly think of the answer which i had before given, that, for anything i knew, the watch might have always been there." well, why not? because, as paley points out, the watch shows great complexity. the watch seems constructed. then, he goes on to make the argument, and again, he was a doctor, that all human organs, the parts of our body, are just as complicated as a watch. perhaps, more so. so shouldn't you make the same inference? this is what's classically known as the argument from design. part of paley's argument is plainly right. it's long been observed, there's a rich parallel between biological structures and the structures made by people, the things that we build. so, take the eye. the eye is surprisingly like a camera. both have lenses that bend light, and project an image onto a light-sensitive surface behind it, either the film or the retina. both have a focusing mechanism, a diaphragm that govern amount of incoming light; machine for the camera, muscles for the eye. both help us get images from the world into another medium, in the case of people into our brains. the big difference is, there's no such thing as a camera as anywhere near as good as the human eye. so, paley's view is that, well, you see something so articulately beautifully constructed, it seems to cry out for a designer. this is an argument that's been made through history. cicero for instance, made the same argument. you see this argument in current work in so-called intelligent design, and it has huge explanatory advantages. for one thing, it really does explain where things come from, it explains it in a way we understand. just as we know where watches come from, now we know where eyes come from. also i don't want to believe it too obvious, but it's consistent with scripture. it's consistent with belief in the divine creation of humans and other creatures. but there are also problems with this account, the sorts of problems that i don't want to address from a theological point of view, but just from a sort of standard scientific point of view. so, one of these problems, and it's fairly obvious, is that appealing to a divine creator seems to push back the question. this is particularly vexing from a psychological point of view. we're interested after all in where creatures come from, creatures like us, that can think, understand, plan, and know, and to argue that we're the product of yet another thing that can think and understand, and plan and know. well, it may be true. it's logically possible we were created by a god, or for that matter aliens. but it does seem to push the question back. ultimately, we'll want to know where such original creatures come from. furthermore, there's long been evidence for evolution. long been evidence as seen in fossils and vestigial characteristics like the human tailbone and goose bumps, and all of the genetic and biological evidence for continuity of other creatures. there's a lot of room for debate over the details of evolution, but that evolution has occurred that we were not created in our current form seems reasonably indisputable. then, finally, there's poor design. so, for instance our eye has a blind spot, the male urinary system, the urethra goes through the prostate gland instead of around it. this poor design seems incompatible with omnevolent, benevolent, and omnipotent god. it seems that, if you want to say it was created by god, that god is either somewhat incompetent or somewhat sadistic, and that doesn't actually seem like a good move from either biology or theology. but still, for almost all of human history, the argument from design was a really good argument. the biologist richard dawkins, at one point said that anybody before darwin who didn't believe in god was ignorant. it was ignorant of the rich complexity of biological structures and uninterested or unwilling to accept the most natural explanation for them. it may not be perfect, the argument from design, the argument that leads to a creator, but it's the best we had. but of course, darwin changed all of this. so, darwin had many accomplishments. he was not, as many people get confused, but he didn't discover evolution. people knew about evolution long before darwin. rather, his profound accomplishment was showing how these complex creatures like the parts of our body, and into creatures that have these parts of the body like us, could come from. i kind of agree with dawkins that this is a discovery equal in importance to the claim that the earth revolves around the sun and we're not the center of the universe. it's the idea of natural selection outlined in the classic work, origin of species. i think there's a case to be made that it's most important idea in the sciences ever. now, this isn't a course in evolution or evolutionary biology, but just to remind people of the core ideas, and if you want to pursue it. there's also a lot of excellent books on the topic, including dawkin's own blind watchmaker. the core idea is that there's three components. there is random variation. this variation gives rise to differences in survival and reproduction and gets passed on from generation to generation. these three steps taken together will give rise to adaptations, in which animals evolve to become better suited to survive in their world. there's all sorts of examples. a simple example is camouflage. so, you could see animal's capacity to- for some animals to have markings that make them difficult to be seen by other creatures is not an accident. it'd be bizarre to say it's just some weird coincidence. nor is it divine creation. the darwinian argument is that some animals just randomly do better at blending into the environment. as a result, those animals do better, they survive and reproduce more. as a result of that, those traits, those genes as we'd call them now, that led to this better blending into environment, gets spread within a population, and then so on and repeat and repeat until you get animals are really good at hiding themselves. in a similar argument, for instance, could be sketched out in terms of the eye. so, a great thing like the eye was not created all at once, but rather is the product of increasing adaptation for the task of sensing the world. in fact, darwin himself noted that you could look at different animals, and you could reconstruct a pathway from no eye to a fully developed eye. more recently, people have done computational models of this very thing. so, you're now wondering why in the world am i talking about this? am i here trying to sort of proselytize for evolutionary theory in the middle of an intro psych class? but as we'll see, this connects intimately to the study of psychology, and in particular, to the study of the emotions.
so, we see now the two ideas come together. the first that, mental life is the product of our physical brains, materialism and the second is that biological entities like the brain are the products of natural selection. so, the brain psychology is a product of evolution, no less than the eye or the hand, and this changes everything among other things, this tells us what we should expect to find as part of human psychology, as part of universal psychology and what we shouldn't. it then becomes rational to see the mind as adapted to fulfill certain tasks, and i've written some of these here. this is very far from a complete list. now, there are certain confusions people get into when they start thinking about psychology from an evolutionary point of view, certain misconceptions, and i want to warn you against two of them. the first is that natural selection, the forces of evolutionary adaptation cause animals to want to spread their genes. so, sometimes you hear," well, if evolutionary psychology is right, people should want nothing more than to spread their genes to mention one, inseminate women, women should be inseminated and have children and everything. if evolutionary psychology is right, males should be rushing to the sperm bank to produce as many deposits as possible". but this is a confusion, and it's actually easy enough to see the confusion because according to natural selection, other creatures like mice, and rats, and dogs, and whatever, also have evolved to spread their genes, but we don't assume for a second that they want to spread their genes, we understand they haven't even known anything about genes. the confusion here is the distinction between ultimate causation and proximate causation. those are fancy terms, but ultimate causation is, the reason why something has evolved, and that involves creature's history and it's the evolutionary course its taken through time. proximate causation is what a creature wants, and those are different. the point is actually very well made by william james. the reason why we've evolved to have feelings like hunger has to do with sustaining our body with this sort of utility we get from food. but he points out from a psychological point of view, this is not the case. 'not one man in a billion taking his dinner ever thinks of utility. he eats because the food tastes good and makes him want more. if you were to ask him why he should want to eat more, what tastes like that, instead of revering you as a philosopher, he will probably laugh at you for a fool.'' or take another case, why do i love my kids? well, the ultimate causation, the evolutionary reason is not difficult to appreciate. i love my kids because creatures that love their kids spread their genes while creatures who don't love their kids, who are indifferent to their kids don't. but, from approximate psychological point of view, that's not why i love my kids. my love for them has nothing to do with spreading my genes. i would love them if they were adopted. i would love them if they had no plans to ever produce children or were unable to produce children. therefore, an evolutionary dead end. evolution wires up our psychology to achieve certain ends, but our psychology's typically ignorant as to evolution's goals. in fact, from a moral point of view, i think it's safe to say these are very different. there's no reason why as people, we should want to pursue the goals and you put that in quotation mark because when we talk about goals for evolution is metaphorical. to pursue the goals of evolution, from an evolutionary point of view, animals are designed to replicate themselves to spread their genes, but as people, we can have very different priorities. a second misconception about evolutionary approaches to the nine is that they predicted everything should be an adaptation, that everything we do has adaptive significance exist in order to increase the reproductive success of the animal. but, that's not how it works. natural selection doesn't directly influence behaviors, rather, natural selection evolves brains and bodies. once they come to exist, they do all sorts of things. some are adaptive, some are what they've evolved to do. others are not, and this is true for instance for hiccups or lower back pain or self pity. it doesn't make sense to look at everything that people do and say, ''wow, that must exist for a purpose.'' rather, some things are adaptations and some things are not. it's also important to realize that our brains have evolved over a period of many millions of years, largely adapted once we became humans and separated from other species, living roughly as hunter-gatherers or at least in some sort of small group without access to alcohol or television or facebook or all of the things in modern technology. we haven't adapted to live for instance in a world full of billions of people and so we might be ill-suited to do so. some of the behaviors we do in a world full of billions of people with high-technology and abundant food for many of us may actually be to our detriment. so, one of the difficult things to do and one of the most interesting projects in evolutionary psychology is figuring out which of our mental traits, our behaviors, our desires are adaptations and which of them are accidents. now, some things seem to be obvious adaptations, like color vision. mostly our perceptual system is plainly evolved to make sense of the world. one might argue that language, although people will debate exactly how it came into being, must have an adaptive value because it's a communication system, animals evolve communication system. they benefit greatly from them. but, then there's all sorts of things, which are plainly accents. no one would argue that the universal love of pornography is an adaptation rather sexual desires and adaptation pornography exploits it. our love of television isn't because we've evolved special brain mechanism for dealing with television, we couldn't have, televisions to reason the invention. or take our love of chocolate. our love of chocolate probably isn't good for us, it's not adaptive in any sense, but we evolved a sort of taste for the sweetness of fruit and other sweet things that are calorie rich and good for us when we live in a very different environment. chocolate is a clever machine designed to tickle our appetites that have evolved for other purposes and give us pleasure, but not necessarily be good for us. now, these are easy cases, but then there's real hard cases where nobody really knows why it evolved. cases like our pleasure we get from art or music, female orgasm, is this a special adaptation or is this just a by-product of the sheer physiology between males and females? humor, sexual violence, xenophobia, there's a long list of things we could put down where one will be able say, ''oh, we've evolved that through natural selection for session so purpose.'' other people will say, ''no, it's an accident, we, as a product of culture or because we have big brains or something else. those are the sort of very interesting debates that psychologists have to resolve on a case-by-case basis, and these are the sorts of questions one ends up asking upon taking an evolutionary approach to the mind. now, one of the cool things about taking such an approach is that it leads us to look scientifically at what most people take for granted. the clearest case of that is, again the emotions. so here's william james again talking about the emotions, ''to the psychologist alone, can such questions occur as: why do we smile when pleased and not scowl? why are we unable to talk to a crowd as we talk to a single friend? why does a particular maiden turn her wits upside-down? the common man can only say, of course we smile, of course our heart palpitates at the sight of the crowd, of course we love the maiden. so probably does each animal feel about the particular things it attempts to do in the presence of certain objects. to the lion, it is lioness, which is meant to be loved, to the bear, the she-bear. to the broody hen, the notion would probably seem monstrous that there should be a creature in the world to whom a nest full of eggs was not utterly fascinating and precious and never-to-be-too-much-sat-upon object it is to her.'' now, there's a few things to note here. one is the rating of sexist, it assumes a male audience as william james was up with up to do. the second is it's beautifully written. it's hard to find contemporary psychologists who write this way. the third is, the point is really important. there are all sorts of things that seem natural to us, but actually reflect our evolutionary histories. they are contingent and they need explaining, and you know you can add to the list. why does poop smell bad? why does chocolate tastes good? why do we love our children for the most parts? why do we get angry when people hit us? why don't we feel good when somebody does us a favor? and as scientists, we have to withdraw from our intuitions, we have to just block ourselves from saying, ''well, that's how it is,'' and step back and look at it scientifically. this is similar to what other scientists do. other scientists ask questions like, why do things fall down? why is our flesh warm? why does water turn solid when it gets cold? the universe didn't have to be this way. so, they had to discipline themselves to take common sense, what everybody knows and explore it scientifically as an open question that needs to be answered. as psychologists, we're going to use the tools of evolutionary theory to step back and explore the nature and origins of the most intimate aspects of ourselves including our emotions. now, we've done this before. we've already talked about aspects of cognitive psychology, perception, memory, language, looking at how things work and where do they come from. but now armed with evolutionary thinking, we're going to start to think a little bit closer about something, maybe a little bit more, as i said more intimate, and maybe a bit more difficult and troubling to address, which is the emotions. the first thing we're going to do is we're going to talk about a final misconception, and this is a misconception about the emotions and how they work. this is a misconception you see often in science fiction, and my example here is star trek, the tv show and the movie. so, star trek has major characters. most notably the vulcan spock and android data who are described as lacking emotions. spock lacks emotions because he's half alien. data lacks emotions because he doesn't have an emotion clip. these characters are described as doing great, hyper efficient, fully-functioning, excellent star fleet agents. they just lack a little human quirk that makes them interesting and there are episodes where they discover their emotions or get emotions and it changes everything. but the supposition of the show is that you don't need emotions to do 99 percent of things. as we'll see, this is entirely mistaken. emotions are fundamental to human life. we don't see them any more as noise in the machine, as things that sway you from getting it right, as enemies of rationality and morality, but rather as products of evolution, and they're there for a reason. as we'll see, one way to make sense of the reason is, they set goals and priorities. plainly, our emotions are shaped by cultural contexts. depending on who you are and where you live, your emotions will be different, they'll respond to different things. but just as we'd expect from an evolutionary perspective, they have universal roots. there are aspects of emotions that all of us share and that's what we'll begin with now.
facial expressions were a great source of interested to charles darwin. what you see here is a series of illustrations of experiments done at this time, where volunteers had their faces shot so as to contort them into different expressions sort of to provide a science of the face. darwin's view was that facial expressions were interesting in so far as they talked about the origin of the expressions in our evolutionary history, and the origin of the emotions that gave rise to the expressions. why is it that anger gives us rise to one face and sadness another? how can we develop a theory of this and relate it to the facial expressions of our neighbors like chimpanzees or even dogs. all of this presupposes a universality. to make the case for universality, i'll let paul ekman start it off. why i have a face. my god, how can we live without a face? we wouldn't know who we were, one from another. we wouldn't to be able to know people's age as readily. you would lose age, you'd lose identity. it's a site for sexual signals, for our feelings, our emotions. we wouldn't survive without faces. for most people, their face is really their sense of identity, it's who you are, what marks you as, how you tell one person from another. it's probably the most personal or one of our personal parts of representations that we have. not just because of the sensors. although, clearly if your taste and smell and eat, and breath, that's awfully an important part of yourself, but yeah, behind the face is the brain and the face of course is the display system, the primary one for emotions. in my first wave of study, the first series, i just worked with people in literate cultures. south america, japan, europe, and north america as well. but the problem was you could always say everybody had learned his expressions from the tube or the magazine. maybe it was john wayne and charlie chaplin, not our evolution that was responsible. so to answer that, i went to 1967, 20 years ago, to a pre-literate culture in new delhi, a group that had not had any contact at that time with the media. the first thing we did was to show the picture and ask them to make up a story. what happened? why is this person showing this face? we analyzed those, and that's how we got for example that the best most common story for a fear face was a wild pig is after you and you have no weapon. best story for a sad face, when it come up most often was when a child had died. let's make a face. here are the instructions, you can do this at home. lower your brows and draw them together, tense your lower and upper eyelids, stare, your eyes could bulge a bit, and now press your lips together with the corners straight or down. you'd probably look like this. this is a face, the emotion that this face corresponds to is anger. if you saw somebody with this face anywhere in the world, it's a reasonable bet that they're angry. it's not perfect, there are subtle differences in facial expressions, there are differences in how people show it. of course he may just be pretending to be angry or trying to fool you and yet, there are irregularities in universals. there are databases of facial expressions from all over the world. this one's from japanese women. look at facial expressions, and they look kind of the same. let's do another face. raise the corners of your lips back and up, raise your cheeks and raise your lower eyelids if you can. don't injure yourself. you're probably smiling. this is a series of pictures taken from the internet of course of smiling babies, because babies smile early on. this is my younger son zachary when he was smiling as a baby. this is just to show that the facial expressions of non-human primates, though far from identical to that of humans, share some commonalities with our own. like other facial expressions, smiles serve as social signals. so. it's not quite right to say we smile when we're happy. we're more prone to smile when we're happy and we want others to know it. so for instance, there's been studies of athletes going on stage or doing their athletic performance. bowlers, when they knock down all the pins, are often have stoic faces, and then they turn around to face people and then they grin. olympic gold medal winners are not typically smiling all through the ceremony, but when they stand up to get their metal, they beam. if you think about the times when you're very happy but by yourself, you might notice you're not necessarily smiling. smiles are social. now, one of the cool findings of the study of smiles is that there's different types of smiles. here's paul ekman smiling twice. but these are not the same smiles. ask yourself for a second, which smile do you see is more genuine. well, one of them is what's called a happiness smile, sometimes known as a duchenne smile, and it's a real smile. it involves movements around the eyes, that's the biggest difference. the other one is what's used to be called a pan am smile or greeting smile, and it's a fake smile. it's just done below the nose. you turn your mouth outwards but that's kind of it. it turns out that even babies can distinguish between the two sorts of smiles. it turns out that studies of happy versus unhappy couples find that the happy ones have more duchenne, more sincere smiles. the college yearbook photos, you could look at people and learn a lot about them from seeing what kind of smile they produce. a third sort of smile is what's known as a the coy smile. it's very interesting. it is often known as an appeasement smile. somebody who has a coy smile will sometimes look away, that it's related to being embarrassed, and it's related to a desire to affiliate. if you're feeling awkward and you're a bit nervous and you want to say "don't hurt me", you might do kind of a coy smile. here is a clip which i'll work through of a baby, coy baby smile. the baby is doing this and doing that. it's kind of adorable, and maybe that's what it's for. maybe what the coy smile is for is to say "i'm adorable. please don't kill me."
here's another emotion. this is a picture of lee harvey oswald, the assassin of john f. kennedy, himself being shot by jack ruby, and zoom in on a police officer standing next to him. you see a typical expression of fear. he just saw a man being shot right in front of him, it's a violent confrontation. of course, he feels fear. now, fear is interesting. it's a social emotion because you can be afraid of people, but it's not primarily social. we can be afraid of a lot of other things as well, and when we ask ourselves, what are people afraid of? this is simple enough to find. you can simply ask people or look at their behaviors, but you find that people are afraid of things like spiders, snakes, heights, storms, large animals, darkness, blood, strangers, humiliation, deep water, living home alone, and what do these things have in common? why aren't we afraid of guns and cars, and electrical outlets? cars and guns, electrical outlets are very dangerous. for electrical outlets, kids get yelled at for going near. while guns and cars kill people, cars are particularly dangerous, yet i've never met anybody don't expect ever to meet anybody who has a phobia of cars. why no people who will leave the room, if there is a snake anywhere nearby. so, where does that come from? we can also ask, what are non-human primates afraid of? what our children in chicago afraid of? what are the biggest fears for instance of children in chicago? the answer for that is they are afraid of snakes and spiders. these are kids who have never seen a snake or a spider outside a visit to a zoo or watching them on tv, and the answer is that this is very badly explained by a class with conditioning theory of fear. it's not as if all of us have been attacked by a dangerous spider which causes enormous amount of pain, and now we're afraid of it. we've learned to be afraid of it. rather evolution seems to play a role, that while certainly we can learn to fear certain things and our fears can be shaped by our experiences, our traumas, it seems that evolution has primed us to fear some things and not others, and i think the study of fear and emotion of fear is a wonderful laboratory through which to explore how evolution has shaped our minds. before i leave facial expressions, fear was the last one, i want make one final point in this lecture, which is that they're awfully hard to fake. so, the clip i'm going to show you now, i'm going to end this lecture with, is of a girl who was surprised by her father. there are many of these videos on youtube. they're very moving to see, and look at her reaction and ask yourself, could she be faking? ask yourself if you're in her shoes, and somebody offers you a lot of money to fake that, that man's not your father. you just post to pretend. could you do it? i think the answer is no, except for very trained, very skilled actors. genuine emotions involve changes that a face in the body involve an intensity that is hard to fake, and say something we waited for, which is if emotions are signals, they evolved to be trustworthy signals. they've evolved to be signals of a sort that other people could take account of, and why is it signals would evolve? is actually a very interesting question. but here i'm going to show you the clip. oh! oh, my god! come here baby.
so let's go back to evolution now. and let's look again at certain emotions. and now i'll ask why do we have them? and we talked about emotions like fear, the function of which seems pretty clear. but now let's look at the emotions that incline us to be kind to others, like compassion and gratitude and so on. these have long been seen as a puzzle for evolution. and in fact, many people now say, well, the very fact that we have kindness and morality means the theory of natural selection can't be right. the theory of natural selection guides us to survive on reproduction. as the phrase goes, we capture evolutionary process in terms of nature, red in tooth and claw. so why would we be kind? how could kindness evolve? and one way to put the puzzle is like this. imagine a population of indiscriminate altruists. and that's just a fancy way of saying a population of creatures whose genes guide them to be nice to everybody. they don't care if their favor's returned. they don't care who they're nice to. they don't care how much it costs. and imagine this society was chugging along, and then a mutation happened. and an animal came into being who accepted the help of others, but didn't contribute. took the benefits, but didn't pay any costs, and we call this a free rider. in life, a free rider is a roommate who's very happy all the other roommates clean the house, but he or she doesn't do any cleaning. a free rider is a colleague who's very happy to join parties and events, but never helps organize. somebody who comes to a place and there's a lot of beer there, but never brings the beer. that's a free rider. and you might imagine the free riders would thrive. they would do better by definition. taking the benefits and not paying any cost does better. and so the puzzle, then, is why did we evolve kindness? how could kindness have survived? how could it be what biologists call an evolutionarily stable strategy? and there's a couple of answers to that question. first, we know it's a problem, because we know there is altruism. we know animals care for their young, they groom each other. vampire bats, for instance, when they hit it big and bite into a horse or some animal like that, will suck up the blood. consume some of it themselves, but then come back and regurgitate it into the mouths of their little vampire bat pups, which are adorable. so we know there's a solution to this, and now we'll talk about it. and actually there's more than one solution. here's part one. and part one involves an idea framed by the biologist, richard dawkins. and dawkins says we are evolved altruists, but we're not indiscriminate altruists. and he took the step of saying, look, let's think about evolution in terms, not of individual animals, but in terms of genes. so what does it mean to say that animals have evolved to survive and reproduce? actually, a better way of putting it is animals are the vehicles that contain genes. and the genes are the replicators. think about it. aren't animals really just survival machines? well, not when you really think of evolutionary theories seriously. suppose there's two genes. gene a makes an animal care for itself and its offspring. gene b makes the animal care just for itself. so gene a is going to win out in the long run, when gene a leads an animal, for when it has offspring, to take care of the offspring and gene b makes the animal eat its offspring. you don't have to be a mathematical biologist to see that gene b isn't going to make it. it's reproduction that matters. but more to the point, having kids is just one way to be related to another creature, to share another creature. i also share genes with my brothers, with my uncle, with my aunt, with my cousins, and so on. and so, more generally, the genes that survive, dawkins argues, are those that make the most copies of themselves. and to use a phrase i used before, animals are vehicles through which genes reproduce. as he puts it, an animal is merely the gene's way of making another gene. and this leads us to kin selection, which is a gene will spread through a population. it either increases the chance that the bearer of the gene will survive. and this is for the genes that lead to emotions like fear. they just help you survive. or if it increases the chances that other animals that also possess the gene will survive. and so to the extent that a gene exists that motivates helping relatives, that gene will spread quickly. a discriminate gene for altruism then will have a better chance of surviving than either an indiscriminate gene for altruism or a purely selfish animal. to the extent, then, that evolution operates the level of genes, there's no hard and fast distinction between one's self and another. in some way, the title of dawkins' famous book, the selfish gene, is grotesquely misleading, because the way dawkins intended it to mean is that the genes themselves are selfish. all they want to do, in some metaphorical sense of want, is replicate themselves. but selfish genes lead to unselfish animals. and it follows from dawkins' theory that pure selfishness, pure doing it for oneself, is biologically untenable. the nature of how animals work suggests that all animals intrinsically have to value the lives of others if only kin. there's a famous story from the biologist, haldane. where haldane is asked, strange conversation i guess, haldane is asked, would you lay down your life for your brother? and he responds, no, but i would gladly give my life for three brothers, or five nephews, or nine first cousins. now, he joking, nobody actually does the math, not even a biologist. but the logic of his response is that he's asked whether he'd lay down his life for somebody who contains 50% of his genes. to always do that, would not be a good evolutionary strategy. but it would make sense to give your life for three brothers, 150%, or five nephews, 125%, or nine first cousins, 112.5%. nobody does the math in their heads, again. but this math has shaped the way our psychologies have developed. and this is one of the ways in which evolutionary theory explains how we could evolve to be kind to others and have emotions that incline us to be kind to others.
so , we've evolved to be nice to kin, and this is influencer psychology in certain ways and the most obvious examples of this concern our relationships to our children because we are most related to our children and our children are most related to us. this is particularly the case for the psychology of birds and mammals including humans as opposed to fish and reptiles. because birds and mammals invest in quality not quantity. we have relatively few offspring so, it's important that we take care of them and that they survive. one of the interesting evolutionary features of creatures like us is that there's a long period of dependence prior to sexual maturity. so this is in some way a biological adaptation, we have slowed down our course of growth. so, we spend this time learning and adapting to our environment before making it out in the world as sort of separate and distinct agents. as a psychologist, there are now two separate psychological stories we have to ask. the first is, what are the psychological mechanisms of childcare of how parents respond to children? the second is, what are the psychological mechanisms underlying how children respond to parents? we know a little bit about the psychology of how we respond to children. for instance, we are wired up to like children, we are wired up to respond to their distress calls which would be like crying in humans, we're wired up to find them cute. so, this picture if you google images and type in cute baby this is one of the things that come up. there are certain features that are present in young mammals across not just humans but other mammals, a large protruding forehead, big eyes, upturned nose, chubby cheeks and we're wired up to find this cute. so, this evolved for dealing with children. what's interesting and an example of an evolutionary accident is that when we see the same features in adults, that influences our perception of them. so, some adults have baby faces and when we see a baby face, leonardo dicaprio is example of an adult with a baby face, relatively speaking. we tend to think of them more as naive, and helpless, and kind, and warm. even though we can tell that they're not really younger and while we respond to somebody who has more of less of a baby's face more of a male testosterone face for men like ben affleck we don't think of them in the same way, we don't think of them as naive, helpless, kind, and warm. this is an example of the psychologies and the byproducts of this adaptations that direct us towards children. then from the child side, children have evolve to develop attachment to adults, and so they will typically attached to whoever's closest, whoever takes care of them, and for a young baby will typically prefer the voice, and face, and smell of the mother and when the baby's able to explore to cuddle around, it will come back to the mother. you wonder why? what's the psychological mechanism underlying that. there's different theories. one theory is what's sometimes called a cupboard theory by bf skinner. so, we looked at his theory of operand conditioning, before and from an operand conditioning standpoint a reinforcement and reward and punishment, the mother's rewarding, the mother gives milk for instance, and so that's why the baby comes back to the mother because of the rewards that the mother yields. a related theory but quite different, is developed by a psychologist bowlby, and bowlby unlike skinner, points to innate tendency specifically evolved for attachment, and argues that there's two forces going on. one is a positive force. babies are drawn to her mother for comfort and social interaction and physical warmth. this feeling of cuddling and a negative force a fear of strangers that drives babies away from individuals who aren't familiar who they aren't attached to. there's been some lovely experiments that presents some evidence for the innate attachment theory by bowlby, some which are done with nonhuman primates. i'll end this part of the lecture by showing you a brief clip from a famous experiment designed to look at the nature of attachment. let me show you a monkey raised on a nursing wire mother. now, here are 106's two mothers. as you can see, it was ringed on a wire mother. here's baby 106. he's going to the wire mother got the [inaudible]. oh he's going back, he's back on the cloth mother and he'll stay on the cloth mother. actually this baby spent some 17 hours a day on the cloth mother and less than one hour a day on the wire mother. we had predicted that the variable of contact comfort, would be a variable of measurable importance. but we were unprepared to find that it completely overwhelmed and overshadowed all other variables, including those of nursing. frankly doctor, if it comes to a choice between wire and cloth, it's reasonable to expect that any child will go to the cloth, that's a matter of creature comfort like a baby with its blanket. but is this really love? well, what do you mean by saying that a baby loves its mother? certainly one thing we mean is that it gets a great feeling of security in the presence of the mother. now, mr. collingwood wouldn't you say that if you frightened a baby, that it went running to its mother was comforted and then all the fear disappeared and was replaced by a complete sense of security that that baby loved its mother? now, in this experiment, this is the apparatus we use. that looks diabolical. that's just the way the baby monkey feels about it. lighting eyes, loud sound, moving mechanical parts, all of these things are designed to frighten a monkey. now here we have a peaceful resting baby monkey. let's find out what his reactions to his mother are when we frighten him. he's scared all right. just like any child will do in a similar situation. he runs away. it's more than running away, he was writing to his mother to touch him to drive away his fear. contact with the mother changes his entire personality. look, now he's actually threatening the diabolical object. all right. this gives us part of the picture of this thing the infantal love.
so, we talked about how animals including humans can evolve to be kind, to be altruistic towards genetic relatives and the influence that this has on our psychologies. but our kindness and altruism isn't limited to those we share genes with. we're also kind to non-kin. so, looking at non-humans, we see animals groom themselves, they give warning cries, they share in the task of child care, they share food, and so on. certainly, in both everyday life and in the hunter-gatherer life of our past, we're kind to one another, we form groups, we help one another. in your everyday life, you're probably connected to people, to friends, to romantic partners who you don't share genes with and yet you have a mutual inclined relationship with. you're actually also probably to some regards kind to strangers and how that comes about is a different story, but we're going to stick to friends. so, one way of thinking about the relationships between friends is in terms of what the biologist robert trivers has called reciprocal altruism. there's a principle where we're more likely to help those who help us. if you scratch my back, i scratch yours and there's mutual benefit. suppose we need to drag in something, maybe a carcass, from one place to another and we both benefit from having it moved, but neither one of us is individually strong enough to move it. if we work together, we both benefit. or, to take a more difficult case, suppose whenever i get a surplus of food, i give you some and whenever you get a surplus of food more than you can eat, you give me some, we both benefit from this. but there's a problem. the problem is, the problem of cheating. what if i helped you on tuesday and you don't help me back on wednesday? we're actually back to the free rider problem. in an animal context, imagine the case of warning criers. so, some animals, if one of them in a group sees some predator approaching, will give off a loud cry to warn everybody else and that benefit of the group. overall, everybody is best off if the creatures in that group give warning cries. but, you know who would really be best off? somebody who took advantage of the warning cries, who will listen to them and responded, but actually didn't give them themselves. imagine a gene that led animals to both give warning cries and respond to warning cries and a second gene that led an animal to respond to warning cries, but not give warning cries, the selfish free rider gene would outproduce the more generous gene. it would have all of the benefits and none of the costs and pretty soon, the whole group would be worst off. so again, we see a similar case where the reciprocal altruism appears to be untenable. there is however a solution. reciprocal altruism can evolve if animals can punish cheaters, can punish free riders. punishment can be actually whacking them in the head or causing them pain or killing them, but it could also be shunning them. in a situation where animals need to interact with other animals to survive, shunning is a powerful punishment. so the claim is, that you find this kindness among non-kin, among non-related individuals. if the animals have evolved a corresponding mechanism for punishment, which requires a lot of psychological apparatus, a lot of cognitive machinery, these animals have to recognize cheaters, they have to remember who they are and hold this memory across time, and had to be motivated to punish. one very general way to see the situation and to see how the situation can be solved is what's known as a prisoner's dilemma. so, here's the logic of the prisoner's dilemma. it's incredibly cool, but we need to walk through it. so, imagine you and a friend commit a crime and you're arrested. you and your friend are put into separate rooms, you are prisoners, and a police officer comes up to each one of you separately and he says, "look, you have two options. you can cooperate with your friend, which means you say nothing, you don't squeal on your friend, you don't blame your friend or you can defect," and the police officer says, "do you defect?" you say, "yes, we did it and it was all his fault." so, if you cooperate with your friend and your friend cooperates with you, you both get a fairly mild sentence. you get one year in prison. they can't pin the whole crime on you, but they have some other evidence and so on. if however, you squeal on your friend and your friend keeps his mouth shut, you go free. you just walk away. if you cooperate with your friend and he squeals on you, you're in big trouble man. your friend will walk away and you will spend the rest of your life in prison. if you both squeal on each other, you'll each get a very long prison sentence. so, the police officer says, "so, look at this and be aware that your friend is looking at the same sheet and making the same choices." well, of course, in real life they don't actually explain to you prisoner's dilemma. this actually is not so different from what actually happens when people are arrested for crimes, often for serious crime. they really will be put in a separate room and be told, "look, give up on your friend and you'll get a lesser sentence," and they'll say, "i tell you, your friend is getting the same offer. whichever one acts first wins." it's a matter of trust, really. if you trust your friend and you know he won't defect on you, and he trust you and know you won't defect on him, you both cooperate. but he says, the cop says, "i want you to observe something really interesting about your options. suppose he cooperates with you, what's the best option for you? what will turn out best for you?" well, if he cooperates, that's the top two squares, your best thing for yourself is to defect. that's the upper right corner, then you walk away. suppose he defects on you, well, what's your best option? your best option again is to defect. you will get 20 years in prison, but it's just better than life in prison. so, when faced with this option, you say, "fine, i defect and i want to squeal on my partner." he gets the same option and then he squeals on you. so, this is a weird and unhappy outcome. here's a way to phrase the prisoner's dilemma more abstractly. the best case is to defect while the other person cooperates. the worst case is to cooperate when another person defects. the best over all is if each cooperate and the worst over all is if both defect. the puzzle is, as a police officer has reminded you, regardless of what your opponent does, it would be better off defecting, but if both people defect, both are worse off. now, once you start hearing about a prisoner's dilemma, you see it everywhere. imagine my wife and i decide to divorce. we each struggle separately with the option of getting an expensive and carnivorous divorce lawyer. so, plainly i think and she thinks, if we don't, if we just go to mediation, we'll split our money, we'll both do okay. but then something occurs to me. if i choose yes to getting a carnivorous and expensive divorce lawyer and she chooses no, i'll get everything. she'll lose everything, very tempting. also i worry, if she gets a lawyer and i don't, i lose everything and she gets everything. faced with the logic, it seems inevitable that we both get expensive lawyers, we have a lengthy court battle and we don't both do pretty badly. you have two countries and they're deciding whether or not to build up their weapons and their military, which are very expensive. they both decide, no, and they say, "ah, it's okay, not bad." but then, it occurs to them that if one country chooses yes and the other one chooses no, the one who chooses yes really gets everything, they could invade the other country and the one who chooses no is in a very bad situation. so, faced with this logic, they both choose yes and then they both do pretty badly. prisoner's dilemmas are everywhere. now, there may be no solution to the one-shot prisoner's dilemma. where you deal with another individual who's a stranger, you just interact once and you make your choice. but now imagine that you get to play the prisoner's dilemma game over and over and over again with a certain individual, what's the best strategy? what's the best strategy for the maximum payoff? you could even think about this for a moment. would you always defect? would you always cooperate? would you be random? what would you do? many years ago, the scholar robert axelrod put together a competition. the competition involved people participating by bringing computer programs, establish different strategies for solving the prisoner's dilemma and the idea is that each of the programs would play multiple games. what's really cool is that the winning program was extremely simple. it was actually four lines of computer code. it was the simplest program that they had. it worked on a principle that was developed by anatol rapoport. it worked on a principle called tit for tat. it just had two very simple rules. the first is, the first time you meet a new program, cooperate. the second is, after that, do on each trial what the other program did on the previous trial. you see, this has a genius to it. it's nice, it starts friendly, it's not a sucker. if it starts friendly and you defect on it, it will then defect back, but it's forgiving. once you're nice, it's going to be nice right back. it basically rewards niceness with niceness and meanness with meanness, and it's transparent. the logic of it's clear enough that it's easy to figure out how to work together for mutual gain. if i'm going to play with a tit for tat machine for a long series of games, i will just cooperate all the time because i know my cooperation will be rewarded with cooperation. what's really cool is, evolutionary psychologists have pointed out that our social emotions, how we heel for other people, seem to be calibrated to different aspects of the prisoner's dilemma. so, we feel gratitude and liking for people who cooperate with us, which motivates us to be nice to them in the future, we feel anger and distrust to those who betray us, which motivates us to betray or avoid them in the future, and we feel guilt when we betray someone who cooperates with us. this motivates us to behave better in the future. here it is lined up in terms of the different parameters of the prisoner's dilemma options, which is, i think a beautifully elegant way of how evolutionary considerations and game theoretic considerations and evolution of cooperation can actually provide some really interesting insight into the nature of our emotions and the nature of our psychology more generally.
sometimes our emotions guide us to act in ways that are, in some formal sense, irrational. but in a practical sense, are actually beneficial. and one illustration of this is gained from behavioral economics called the ultimatum game. and here's how the ultimatum game works. you have two characters, a and b. and a is given, say, $10 and is asked how much of this $10 do you want to give to b? everything from a dollar to all of it. and the rule is that b now has an option. b can either accept the money, so now a keeps whatever money a didn't give away and b keeps whatever money he or she got or rejects it. and if b rejects it, nobody gets anything. now, imagine if the people are perfectly rational. if people are perfectly rational, then the offer a should offer the minimum $1. and b should accept it, because $1 is better than nothing. if you say, i reject it, nobody gets anything. and remember, this is a one shot game. you're just playing this once, so you can't really punish people so that they behave better in the future. but interestingly, even for a one shot game, people don't do this. they often don't accept unfair distributions, they reject them out of spite. so, i know if i'm dealing with such a person, if i offer him or her $1, or $2, $3, they'd say, no way, and now, nobody gets anything. but because of this, because of their irrationality, they get more money from me than a rational person would get. if i'm dealing with a rational person, i just give a small amount of money. dealing with an irrational person, i have to deal with more. and in general, there's a social usefulness of irrationality, of being emotional. a rational person is easily exploited, because their response to provocations and to assault is always going to measured inappropriate. if i go up to somebody and i steal a dollar from him, a perfectly rational person will say, i'm not going to make a big deal out of it, it's only a dollar. a person with a temper will have an advantage, a person with a temper might say you stole my dollar, i'm going to kill you. i'm going to kill your whole family and that's crazy. but when you deal with a crazy person, the person has the advantage that you're less likely to want to provoke them. now there are matters of degrees here, it gets complicated. if a person is too prone to respond to provocation, then you won't deal with them at all. so there's a certain optimal level of irrationality. if a person would only accept a distribution if you gave them $7 then you know, they're a rotten person to deal with and then you'll both end up worse in the end. but these sort of considerations leave you to realize that responding perfectly rational to a situation is a disadvantage, sometimes. particularly, in a case where there's the possibility of violence and assault. a reputation for erratic and extreme response can make you better off. now, it often pays to be irrational, but it can have tragic results. what's adaptive for individuals and what makes sense from an evolutionary point of view may be very bad for people in general. in their wonderful book on murder, on homicide, daily and wilson point out that a major cause of murder is actually offenses to people's honor, insults, curses, petty infractions. and they write, in chronically feuding and warring societies, an essential manly virtue is the capacity for violence. to turn the other cheek is not saintly but stupid. or contemptibly week. now what we see here, it's an idea i am introducing at the very end. is that there are cross-cultural differences in the extent to which certain emotions and certain sentiments are expressed. and interestingly here, the importance of reputation and importance to reputation for a capacity for violent reprisal varies from culture to culture. sociologists describe a culture of honor and a culture of honor is one where you can't rely on the law. and you have resources that are easily taken, like herders. and in such a culture, a capacity for excessive violence is essential to keep your resources. and we see these cultures of honors around the world. there are scottish highlanders, masai warriors, bedouin tribesmen, western cowboys,. one case in the united states, an area where there's more of a culture of honor is the american south. it was settled by scottish and irish herdsmen, and they have less centralized legal control. you don't need a reputation for violence if there's a cop around every corner, if attacks on you can be addressed properly and quickly by the state. you need it when there's no police to help you. and what's interesting is that we can see the culture of honor manifest itself in all sorts of psychological differences. between individuals within such a culture and outside such a culture. so if in the united states, for instance, you find people who are raised within cultures of honor have more permissive gun laws. they're more accepting of capital and corporal punishment. they have better attitudes towards the military. they're more forgiving towards crimes of honor, like killing someone in a fight because they insulted somebody you love. and they have higher rates of violence but only for crimes associated with honor. they don't have higher rates of violence because they have more violent gang wars or more violent bank robberies. but rather bar fights, things that are triggered by insults to one's honor. and a very cool study, which i'll end with, explored this by nisbett and wilson. they did this at university of michigan, and they tested undergraduates. and they were from a narrow group, they were all white males, not hispanic, not jewish. some of them came from the south, and some of them came from the north. and they didn't know what the experiment that they were doing was about. but what happened was, they get to go to a room, and they fill out some papers and did some tasks. and then they were told to walk across the hall. as they were walking across the hall, a graduate student walked by and bumped them with his shoulder, nudged them aside, and then said a very rude word to them. now, afterwards, they were tested. and it turned out that the people from the south were far more upset, energized by this interaction than the people of the north. they had greater levels of testosterone, cortisol, stress hormones. they gave a stronger handshake. they gave more violent words when asked to fill in the blank and this suggests that their psychologies are different. that in some subtle way being raised in one culture makes you, among other things, more aggressive when insulted then in another culture. emotions, although having evolutionary roots, can be calibrated by culture. and more generally, i hope that the studies we talked about and the evolutionary approach that we took. suggests that emotions like fear and the love we have towards our kin, anger, gratitude and so on aren't noise in the system. they aren't aberrations we should get rid of. we wouldn't be better off without them. rather, they're complex motivational systems evolved to solve problems, sensitive to the culture. exquisitely crafted to deal with these natural and social environments that we live in.
for many of us, social psychology is the most interesting field of psychology. social psychology is the branch of psychology that deals with how we have social interactions and social thoughts, what we think of ourselves, what we think about other people, how we behave in groups, how we think about different groups, and so on. it's just extremely interesting, it's interesting, both because these are intrinsically interesting topics, everybody's interested in themselves, but also because social psychologists have come up with some really cool findings. so, just as some examples to start us off, these are pictures of tony blair and barack obama, and if you ask people explicitly, "who's more american," they find this a funny question because obama's american, was american president, and tony blair is not. but if you look at unconscious biases and stereotypes, various studies find that tony blair is thought of as more american because, due to the color of his skin, many people think of him as more american. or think about subtle influences. one very cool finding is that we are often influenced by factors outside of our control. sometimes, it's called social priming. so, for instance, in one classic study, it turns out that if you're asked to judge a candidate for a job and you're holding warm coffee in your hands as you do it, you're slightly more likely to judge the candidate as a warm person. while if you're holding cold coffee, you'll judge the candidate as a cold person. or as a third example, there's some evidence that we have a form of implicit egoism. so, when asked about our favorite letter, our favorite letter is more often than one would expect by chance to be the first letter of our first or last name. more than that, psychologists find that the sort of people who move to georgia are more likely than you'd expect to have g in their name, or those who become lawyers are more likely in fact to have l in their name, and you could say that one reason why am i psychologist is that my first name is paul. now, these studies, as of late, have generated a lot of scrutiny, and many have argued that the more sexy findings from social psychology, particularly those involving social priming, are not fully robust. that is, through no fault, no fraud, nothing wrong in the part researchers, but just because of various failures to replicate. there's some reason to believe that the sexier findings of social psychology may not hold up. because of this, as i outline the research in social psychology, i'm going to stick for the most part on traditional findings, which i think are reasonably rock solid, and we'll see that these are quite interesting enough in telling us about human nature and how we live in groups.
i want to begin with the self, and i actually want to begin with my favorite psychology finding of all the time, and it's known as the spotlight effect. the phenomena of interest here, is that we tend to think everybody notices us. we tend to think that the spotlight is on us. this was explored in some lovely work by tom gilovich and his colleagues. both look at the fact and see if we're right. so, in this clever study, they asked undergraduates to wear t-shirts with photographs on them, and some of the undergraduates were asked to wear photographs that were a very dislike people, and he did some questions at a time to find out who is disliked apparently. at the time the study was done, people didn't want to have t-shirts with photographs of hitler or the singer-songwriter barry manilow. i like barry manilow myself, so no attack on him. the positive t-shirts were very light figures: martin luther king jr. and the comedian, jerry seinfeld, and what happened is, they got students to go to class just to interact with people wearing these t-shirts and then later on they asked the students, ''how many people noticed your t-shirts?" they also asked the people, ''did you notice what these people were wearing, what our subjects were wearing?" it turned out that the people wearing the t-shirts got it wrong, they got it wrong by a large extent. they felt that the spotlight was on them and it really wasn't. for the most part, we're focused on ourselves, and so we think that other people are focused on ourselves, but the truth is that other people tend to be focused on themselves and i find that reassuring. note that this also shows up in some other research online. so, when we lie, we tend to think that we're transparent that other people because we're so conscious of the fact we're lying. we believe that other people notice it too and they often don't, we're much better liars than we think. so, i like this research, i think it's positive in a couple of ways. one is particularly for the ages in which people tend to attend my classes, just coming out into teenage years. this is a period of where maybe the dominant emotion is embarrassment, is feeling that all eyes are on you, feeling tremendously conscious of how you look, how you act, and particularly when you mess up. it's reassuring to realize that people really are noticing you as much as you, you worry that they are. another implication of this and more general, more cosmic one in fact was pointed out by tom gilovich. when you ask people what they regret when they die, for the most part, this is fairly anecdotal, but for the most part, they regret things they didn't do. gilovich suggests that one explanation of why people don't do things, they don't take that chance is that they don't want to look foolish, and i think the finding that people for the most part aren't looking, is fairly liberating. so, the spotlight effect and illusion of the spotlight effect is for me something worth remembering. a second set of biases have to do with positive traits. so, suppose i ask you, ''compared to everyone else, taking this online course, watching this online lecture, how attentive are you? how smart are you? how dedicated are you? from the very top to the very bottom, give yourself a percentage score." well, if i asked everybody and everybody was accurate, the average would be 50 percent. but, that's not what happens. you probably gave an answer of above 50 percent, most people do, and this is sometimes known as lake wobegon effect which, is based on garrison keillor's fictional town, where all the children are above average. people tend to believe that they are above average, and this shows up in all sorts of domains. it shows up as when you ask people to rate themselves as students, as teachers, as marriage partners, as chess players, as athletes, as drivers, and it's an interesting question what, why. so, one answer is that often when we proceed in life, if we're fortunate we get a lot of feedback, but the feedbacks are often positive. often we hear good things about our performance in certain domains where, a good cook, considerate husband, and so on. another possibility is that when everybody answers the question how good are you, we apply different criteria for goodness. so, one person says, ''i'm a great driver and they think because i'm very safe, very cautious,'' another person as well, ''i'm very good at car parallel parking,'' a third person says, ''i take chances no one else will, that's why i'm a great driver,'' and finally, and this is the one of most interest to social psychologists, we might have a general healthy motivation to feel good about ourselves, and this shows up in a second, sort of a positive bias, the self-serving bias. an idea of the self-serving bias is, that we tend to attribute to ourselves, to our own traits, positive things, more so than for negative things. so, in experiments that look at this, you might ask a student to think about a class he or she did well in compare to a class he or she did poorly in, or ask a professor about a scientific paper that got accepted or a scientific paper got rejected, and when asked why, there's a natural human tendency to view our positive accomplishment as a result of ourselves, we worked hard, we're smart, we put in the effort. while the negative consequences, we're tempted to view as the cause of other external factors. a paper got accepted because it was a wonderful paper, got rejected because the reviewer and editor are morons. we did well in the class because we worked very hard, we did poorly in the class because the professor was unfair, and it shouldn't been held so early in the morning, and so on. this shows up not only in laboratory studies, but in real-world, when athletes describe their successes and failures, when ceo's describe good years and bad years, even when people write accident reports, things that they are plainly responsible for, they often attribute to others. a final sort of self-serving bias, positive bias is that, what we do makes sense, and this falls under a broader theory in psychology known as cognitive dissonance theory, associated with festinger. the idea is that when we experience an internal inconsistency between two things, between two thoughts, and our thought and action, it's unpleasant for us, it leads to dissonance, and we want to reduce dissonance. we want to make things fall into place, we don't want tensions. so, this manifests itself in different ways, one simple example is that people often attend to information that supports their existing view rather than information that challenges it. you might think this is a strange way for a rational creature to behave. if i'm in favor of the republican president united states, you'd think that i'd be really interested in what the democrats have to say, and vice versa. if i'm a pro-life, you'd think i'd be interested in what pro-choice people have to say. if i am really invested in a certain psychological theory, you would think that i would be really engaged in people who object to psychological theory, but the mind doesn't work that way. we often seek out and this is sometimes known as a confirmation bias. we often seek out support for our views, support for ideas, and so think about the magazines you read or the websites you go to, for the most part, they often tend to be in accord with your political views not challenging them. or think about when you get a second opinion on something. everything to how you look, in a certain set of clothes, to second medical opinion. people often don't get a second opinion when they get information, in a first opinion they didn't like, that didn't accord with their expectations. scientists tell us, that science proceeds by seeking out counter-evidence by trying to falsify theories. but, that's not how the human mind works, the human mind wants support. a different manifestation of cognitive dissonance is known as the insufficient justification effect, and this is supported by a lovely and famous experiment. you give people a boring thing to do, and you either pay them very little money, in this case a dollar or a lot of money in this case $20, and then they have to describe the experiment as exciting to somebody else to have to lie about it. then, you get them to rate what they thought of the task, and interestingly, the people who got paid a small amount of money rated the task as more enjoyable, than to people getting a lot of money, and the explanation for this has to do with dissonance. you just did something, you lied, you did something wrong. well, why did you do it? well, if you get paid a lot of money, you could say, i wish i had a justification, everything's in accord, i have enough money to make me do it, it made sense. but, if you did it for a little bit of money, that may not sit well with you, and so then you say, ''well, i must have enjoyed the task, the task was fun, the task was worth doing.'' cognitive dissonance really matters, it shows up in all sorts of ways, and in all sorts of aspects of everyday life. in a classic book, when prophecy fails, social psychologists looked at, what happens when people who believe the world is going to end, come up to the time when it's supposed to end, and it doesn't end. well, they don't throw away all their views, they don't say, "god, i was mistaken," rather they re-frame it to say, ''wow, well, i guess all our preparations and our plans worked, and we've slightly stalled end of the world, without the date slightly wrong. cognitive dissonance is a theory for why so many organizations engage in hazing, brutal treatments in order to become a member of the group, the idea being that if you go through some sort of humiliating experience to enter a group, that'll make you more invested in the group. it'll make you because you'll have to tell yourself, why did i go through a humiliating experience, well the group must have really been worth it, and to make your mind consistent, you then up the value of the group. i think it's immoral for fraternities and so on to haze people. but, there's no doubt that it actually is powerfully effective. therapists want you to pay, because you'll value the therapy more. things that you do, that you volunteer for, you become more committed to, than things that you get paid for, because you get paid for it, you don't have to love it, but if you volunteer for it, you do have to love it. benjamin franklin has a next last example, his advice on how to make an enemy love you, is surprising and interesting. go up to the enemy, and ask him or her for a favor, that seems weird. why would that make them love you, but cognitive dissonance tells a story, which is that they feel obliged to do the favor, they didn't have to explain themselves why did they do a favor for you, and then they'll conclude, they must have liked you. finally, and this is many parents know, many teachers know, there's a danger in rewarding children to do things that you'd want them to like, like paying them to read. the danger is that, if you're paid to read, the story they'd tell about reading as they do it for a financial reward, but if you can get them to do it without some sort of financial award, they would then tell themselves a different story and the story is, that they like to read. there's a lot of arguments over how cognitive dissonance works in a proper way to frame it, but nobody doubts that phenomenon like these are real, and they make a real difference in our lives.
so in the last lecture, we talked about the self and different psychological phenomena building around the self that everybody notices us, we're terrific or at least above average, and what we do make sense. what i want to do here is very briefly give a core finding of attribution theory, which is a theory that explores how we make sense of ourselves and others. so, attribution theory explores causes of people's behavior. in everyday life, we try to explain why certain events and behaviors occur. an early researcher named heider proposed that we naturally attribute others' actions to personality characteristics. this is sometimes known as a person bias, and it's a bias because it's not always accurate. we tend to give too much weight to personality and not enough weight to situational variables. this is sometimes known also as the fundamental attribution error, and there are a lot of examples of this. one study which is kind of fun is, you put people in a situation, two people. one where they get to ask hard questions that they make up, another one has to answer the hard questions. so, if you play this plainly, it's easy for somebody to make hard questions that another person can't answer. so, you do that, one person asks the hard question, another one doesn't answer. repeat, repeat, repeat. then we ask a third person, who's smarter. even if the decision of who to ask the questions or answer the questions was determined through a toss of a coin, people think that the question asker was smarter, after all they asked all the hard questions and the other person didn't know the answers to them. ignoring the fact that this is entirely the product of circumstances. in general, a lot of everyday life works this way. so, people tend to overestimate the intelligence of professors. they do so because when they listen to professor talk and they see him in class or they see her at a seminar or at a conference, they hear the professor talking in great detail about what he or she knows the most about and they assume, wow, that's really smart. the person really seems to be smart. missing the fact that of course, professors tend to teach and talk about the very small area that they know about. it's the circumstances of being asked to teach an area that makes them look smart, that makes them say smart things, not any natural psychological giftedness. the most extreme demonstration of the fundamental attribution error or the person bias is in a fascinating tendency we have to see actors as if they're the characters they play. so, a robert young was a pitchman for sanka coffee, and even though his main expertise was, he played a doctor on television. now, when someone's playing a doctor on television and doing doctor things and saving lives and giving doctor advice, the rational conclusion is they're doing so because this is the situation. during that they're an actor and these are their lines. but the mind doesn't work that way. when we see somebody do something, our natural tendency for an attribution is to attribute it to the person themselves. so, we credit robert young with the accomplishments of marcus welby m d. for this reason, for instance, people tend to think sylvester stallone is a tough macho guy because he plays in movies where he's a tough macho guy even though he spent vietnam in switzerland, i think teaching at a girls school if i remember right. my very favorite example is that of the actor, leonard nimoy who was an extremely interesting actor. played many roles, led a rich life, was forever identified with his main character, the emotionless vulcan spock on star trek so much so that he published a book called, i am not spock, differentiating himself from the character. but our person bias is so strong that eventually even he gave up and ultimately published another book saying, to hell with it, i am spock.
so, we've talked about the self. we've talked about self and other. now, let's look at how we think about other people, and turn away from attribution, but look towards the question of what we like about other people. this is of course, a classic problem we struggle with as scientists, but also in everyday life, what attracts us to others? what can we do to become attracted to others? there are obvious answers that are probably true, traits like honesty, kindness, intelligence, and so on. but social psychologists emphasize in the course of human affairs, other, perhaps more fundamental processes also play a role. so, one is simply familiarity. the more you see something, the more you like it. this applies for objects, it applies for squiggles, it applies for pictures, and it applies for people. there's numerous studies finding that just being in the presence of another person, makes you more attracted to them over time. now, you can overdo it. you could become sick of a person, but familiarity is still considerable boost. in fact, when you look at studies about who gets married to each other, and who becomes friends with each other, you find that proximity plays a huge role. just being close to somebody down the hall, in the college dormitory, or in the same block in a neighborhood, means you see the more often. you see more often, you're just more likely to get together. the idea that just seeing something, nothing more, causes you to like it more is known as the mere-exposure effect, and again, has been studied over a range of different things. then there's similarities. you might have heard opposites attract. there's actually no reason to believe that. we tend to like individuals who are similar to us. then plainly, there's attractiveness. if i had the time to have a lecture on sexual desire and sexual psychology, we will look at a different theories as to what makes a person attractive, but here we mean physical attractiveness. physical attractiveness plays a powerful role in who we choose to be with as short-term partners, as long-term partners, as friends, and so on. in fact, there's a more general attractiveness bias, which is physically attractive people are not only more attractive to us, they are also considered to be smarter, and more competent, and more social, even more moral. there are studies suggesting that teachers rate good-looking kids as smarter and higher achieving, that we give attractive kids more slack. when an ugly kid does something bad, you think less because they're a bad kid. when a good-looking kid does something bad, you might blame the situation. there's even studies involving mock trials where judges give longer prison sentences two unattractive people. all of this leads to what psychologists like to call a matthew effect. a matthew effect is based on a passage in the bible which says, "for unto everyone that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath." which is a fancy way of saying the rich get richer, and the poor get poorer. in this context what this means is, it's really nice to be blessed with good looks. it suggests great unfairness in the universe that the fact that you're blessed with good looks, means everything else comes easier to you as well. so, that's one phenomena about human attractiveness. another one, in how we judge people, and how we decide what to think of people, and who to get close to is the power of first impressions. so, there's a famous experiment by kelly where you bring in a speaker, and you give people information before about the person, and half of them are told that the person is very warm, and others have told rather cold. this shapes the interpretation of what the guest speaker is thought of later on. if you thought they were warm, you interpret them as more warm. if you thought they were cold, you interpret them as more cold. if you're meeting somebody, and before you meet them, your friend says he has a bit of a temper. now, everything you see from their behavior is shaped by that first interpretation. it sets up a schema, it sets up a structure of understanding. so, first impressions are very powerful. another finding which is actually rather cool and rather intuitive, is that we form first impressions very quickly. this is sometimes called thin slices. the idea is that if you show people a clip of behaviors, could be like five seconds long, people are surprisingly good at making judgments. for first, they do make judgments. we're naturally judgmental, and we very rarely say, "well, that's not enough information." we find it easy to make judgments. we make judgments about people's teaching evaluations, about their personality, ratings, where they stand on the big five we talked about earlier, and whether or not they're gay or straight. in each of these cases, people do pretty good. people do better than average. a final twist in the impressions of others is concerns the facts that our perceptions of other people have on other people. so, it's not like we're judging wines, or houses, or landscapes, where you judge a static thing and that's it. when you judge people, there's an interaction effect where how you judge a person often affects how the person behaves later on. this is sometimes known as a self-fulfilling prophecies, where your beliefs and expectations about a person create reality. more specifically, it's known as the pygmalion effect. the pygmalion effect is person a thinks person b is a certain way, and person b might behave in accordance with that characteristic. it was based on this play by george bernard shaw, my fair lady in musical. somebody has transformed through the intentions of another person, and a person who's transformed, eliza doolittle, says in the play, "you see really and truly, the difference between a lady and a flower girl, is not how she behaves, but how she's treated. i shall always be a flower girl to professor higgins because he always treats me as a flower girl and always will." the terminology is pretty archaic, and to be honest, i'm not entirely sure what a flower girl is, but the logic is if you treat somebody like a virtuous honest person, they're likely to become virtuous and honest. if you treat them as cruel and indifferent, it will cause them to become cruel and indifferent. there's a lot of studies of the self-fulfilling prophecy, and i'll end with one of them by rosenthal and jacobson, where you went to a school, and they did iq test with kids, and they told teachers that the test was a ''spurters test''. the test is going to select kids whose iq is going to bump up. then they just randomly told the teachers, "these students are ''spurters'', they're going to shoot up. these are not." it was totally random, there was no test at all. but as a result of this, the ''spurters'' actually showed improvements in their iq test scores, and this is in part because the teachers believed they were the kids to become ''spurters'', and that made them do better. so, we think about people in all sorts of ways, but it's worth keeping in mind that how we think about them, affects how they really are.
this final part of the social psychology section of this course is going to deal with how we think about groups. these groups could be of all sorts, though there's particular interests for obvious reasons in how we make sense of racial groups, and ethnic groups, and various social groups. so, put differently, we're interested here in the science of stereotypes, and prejudice, and racism. as a starting point, we have to realize that all animals, naturally categorize the world. we naturally collect information about distinct individuals, and we use our information to generalize when we're exposed to new individuals. so, for instance you might not have seen this particular chair, or apple, or dog before, but just by looking at them that are probably a chair, an apple, and a dog, and you can make all sorts of judgments about them. the chair you could sit on, and the apple you could eat, the dog barks. you recognize you might be wrong. there might be a trick chair that falls apart when you sit down on it, the apple might be poisoned, the dog might have a medical condition rendering it silent, but for the most part you make generalizations about things, and you use your generalizations to make your way into the world, and without it, you'd never be able to survive. you wouldn't know what to do, if you saw a chair, or a dog, or an apple. as william hazlitt puts it, without the aid of prejudice and custom, which is his way of expressing the idea that we generalize based on singular examples, i shall not be able to find my way across the room, nor know how to conduct myself in any circumstances, nor what to feel in any relation of life. now this is uncontroversial and has few moral connotations with regard to most of life. you walk to a chair, you want to sit down and you drop yourself on it comfortable it will support you and that's how you live. but of course we make generalizations about people. so, we break the world up into different types of people, you break the world up into men and women, you break the world up based on age, of course based on ethnicity, professions, religion, sexual orientation, nations of birth within a nation where people come from, even something as subtle as the distinction between coming from one american university, versus another american university. i think hazlitt's point holds true here too, where for each of these groups we could make accurate generalizations, and if you lost the ability to do it, you wouldn't cope as well in the world. just to take an extreme example, if you're asking somebody for directions, you probably aren't going to ask a baby in a crib, because you know babies don't know directions. more subtly, if you wanted to make a judgment about somebody's political orientation, you might use your generalizations to help you do so. in fact, it turns out that a lot of research suggesting stereotypes are often positive. if you think about all these groups, you probably believe things about them that are not negative at all or that are good, and more to the point, stereotypes are often accurate. there's a lot of studies showing that when you ask people generalizations about for instance which ethnicities are more likely to become lawyers, or whose tends to be bigger, or who does better at school. people have stereotypes and they use them to make their judgments. but interestingly, they're typically right. we're not stupid. we look at the world, we analyze things, and come to conclusions and make some useful generalizations. if this was all there was to it, there'd be nothing so wrong about stereotyping.
but people worry about stereotypes, and they are right to do so. stereotypes have several problems. so, one is, they actually are not always accurate. we often tend to exaggerate them, and in part, this is due to the confirmation bias, that we talked about earlier in this section, which is that once you have an idea in your head, do the processes of a desire for confirmation are more general cognitive or dissonance forces, you tend to look for things that prove your ideas right. so, if you think that african-americans are aggressive, you'll keep an eye out for cases where you see african-americans who are aggressive, and say that supports my idea. but when you see counter-examples, you tend to ignore them. same if you believe that librarians are quiet, or unattractive, or that male homosexuals are aggressive and pushy, jews are greedy and conniving. once you have a stereotype in your head, it's like the confirmation bias, is like the first impression, it's hard to shake. this could lead to getting things wrong. a second consideration is that a lot of information we get about groups, isn't from an unbiased statistical sample. it's not like we're scientists looking at the data, and accumulating information to lead to reliable statistical conclusions about a group. often for instance, we get our data from the media, or from fiction. if all you know about jews is from shakespeare's character shylock, you're not going to have a very good impression from them. if all you know about italian-americans is from the tv show the sopranos, similarly, that's going to have bad effects. so, people know about this, there's actually considerable pressure or moral pressure, i guess to portray different exemplars of individuals to change stereotypes, make people think differently about what people are, and what people are capable of being. my favorite example is when i was a kid there was a tv show called battle star galactica, and this was a starbuck who was the brave warrior fighter adventurer. in the remake more recently, they changed the characters of course, and now this is starbuck. you can see how this could make a difference. how this could change people's stereotypes for the better, and change how they see the world. also, we're very trigger-happy. we're forming different groups. so, we naturally take group seriously when there really are differences, but we also naturally take group seriously when the groups are arbitrary. the best example is some wonderful research by the social psychologist, henri tajfel, who studied minimal groups. in his classic experiment, he had people do a test, and inthe test they were told that they were either lovers of the artwork of klee, or lovers of the artwork of kandinsky. this was entirely arbitrary, entirely made up. people were just randomly assigned to different groups, but what he found was, that people imbued their groups with identity. they favoured their own group. if you were a klee lover, you'd rather give money to another klee lover than a kandinsky lover. you might think that klee lovers are in certain ways better than kandinsky lovers just by dint of the group splitting up and you belonging to one, and not the other. other studies have found the same effect through a flip of a coin, and there's been some fascinating work with children, toddlers, and even younger children in some studies finding that the wearing a red t-shirt versus a blue t-shirt causes the population to schism into two different groups, and to think differently about the groups, favoring the one they belong to, and disfavoring the one they don't. the moral here then is that when we develop ideas about human groups, when we develop stereotypes, we don't just passively absorb the statistics, we actively distinguish between good. we seem to be built with a hair trigger sensitivity to break the world up into us versus them, and to favor the group containing us over the group containing them.
then there are moral problems with stereotypes. so, let's assume that the stereotypes we possess are accurate. still, even so, even if they're statistically grounded, we often have the intuition that people should be judged as individuals, not as group members. now, this gets complicated for whatever reason society allows certain circumstances where you can judge people as group members. in the united states, for instance, auto insurance, how much money you pay to insure your driving and your car, varies depending on how old you are and other facts about you, like even your grades if you're a teenager. the auto insurers would ground this data that, for instance, younger drivers are more at risk than middle-aged drivers. but at the same time, you wonder whether that would be moral if, for instance, different ethnicities had different records of safety in driving. similarly, we allow some profiling in criminal cases. for instance, there's a strong presupposition when there's a violent crime that the perpetrator is male just because there's so much evidence that men are much more prone to human violent crimes than women. but it gets complicated again to look at ethnicities, and one might say reasonably enough, and this is a philosophical normative debate, not a psychological one, that even if you gain some benefit through racial profiling, the cost in terms of making it to life worse for minority members of the society outweighs any benefit that you get. another further practical issue is that when you're dealing with terrorists groups or other intelligent and benevolent people, if you rely too much on the category, they will change the category in order to thwart you. that is, if you're looking only for males of a certain age and certain ethnicity because they are statistically connected to the criminal or terrorist organization you're looking at, the people in criminal or terrorist organization are not stupid, and they'll act before you. they'll act, for instance, to recruit people who don't look like they're members of that organization. social psychologists are interested in all social aspects of stereotypes and they tend to talk about different levels and different types of stereotypes, and you can imagine a distinction between three levels. one is public stereotypes, which is what we say to other people about a group, the ones we're just upfront about. i'll say men are larger than women. i believe that, on average, men are larger than women. a lot of women are larger than men but on the most part blah blah blah. that's a public stereotype. but then there's private stereotype, which i really believe to be true but i'd never say it to you, not merely in a lecture. i just won't say it to anybody, i just know when i say, "i shouldn't say this." then, and this is perhaps the most interesting case, there's implicit stereotypes, which are unconscious associations that guide us and affect us even if we're not conscious of it. now, we know from a lot of work that public stereotypes have been changing. these are examples from the united states. so, for instance, if you ask people how likely they are to vote for a qualified african-american to be president, if you ask them in '50s and '60s, about half people would say, "no, i won't do it. i don't want an african-american as president." now if you ask now, just about everybody says yes, and actual voting patterns for barrack obama indicated even people who are entirely white communities are quite willing to vote for an african-american to be president. some will ask people with different attitudes in this case about blacks. people ascribe them horrible traits. but as time goes by, they're just less likely to do so, and by 2000 last time, the study was done just about nobody does as is the change in the public stereotypes. the change in the private stereotypes is actually a lot harder to look at almost by definition. so we know a lot less about this. there's actually some very exciting work which is in progress, so i don't have that much to talk about looking at google searches. so, it's to a surprising extent and i think a shockingly disappointing instance, for instance, people use ethnic slurs and racial attacks and a lot of expression of racial hatred when they are in private typing things into their computer. this would suggest that the're a lot of great changes in the public stereotypes. private stereotypes have been slower to change. then there's implicit attitudes. this is a topic of tremendous focus and tremendous interest by social psychologists. so, for instance, in one study, what you might do is you might flash pictures of black faces and white faces subliminally on a computer screen so fast that people don't even know what they're seeing. they don't know they're seeing a face. then you give people words to complete like hos. in this study, they are more likely to complete a word like hos with a word like hostile, if seeing the black face, but hospital if seeing a white face. this is a suggestion that even below the level of consciousness, we have different attitudes towards different racial groups. i'll add that these effects show up not just for white people but also for black people. that is, a lot of implicit biases show up in all groups including the group that's biased against. one exciting method to explore this is the so-called iat method. in fact, if you go implicit.harvard.edu, you could do this yourself. these are basically reaction time methods looking at how quick you are to associate the positive with some groups and a negative of other groups. here's how the game is played. you'll see images. if there is something that is white-american or good, press it with your left hand. if it is african-american or bad, either a face or the word, press it with your right hand. try to do as quick as possible, like this, that would be good. that's bad right, that's a white face left, that's an african-american face, right. so we get your speed at doing this, but then we test you on opposite thing where you connect up african-american are good, and white american are bad, and then we show you different words and different pictures. the logic here is, if you naturally have an association, say between white-american and good, you'll be more fluid in making the responses when the two words are put together than when they're distinguished. now focusing on race here, with iat group has an enormous range of studies of different biases. we look at politics and associations between different skills and different genders. things like religion, things like age, one of the strongest biases, i hate to say this one, the strongest biases people have is against old people. there is little to be said for old people at least implicitly. this is, as i said, really interesting. it's really interesting because it tells us a lot about psychology and a lot about how the mind works but also as real-world relevance. you might say, "look, this is just little studies, differences of a fraction of a second." for one thing, fractions of a second can really matter. there's evidence, for instance, that there are police officers and also people in simulations are more likely to shoot a black person holding a harmless object than a white person. the decision whether to shoot or not is made in fraction of a second, and these biases can apply. also, we often face judgment calls. these are some typical studies, for instance, which find that if you're the only witness and somebody is in trouble, you're just as likely to help them if they're white or black. but if there are other people and you're not sure maybe someone else will help, do i really have to help? you're more likely to help if the person is white than black, and this is if you yourself are white, suggesting a racist bias you may not even be aware of. here's some other work. i love to say a recent study that went on auction site ebay, and it turns out people will bid more for these cards than for these cards even though cards are identical. it's just in the hands that hold them; white versus black are different. the people who are affected by the color of the hands may be unaware they are affected. it is an implicit subtle level. it changes your attitudes and your feelings. we're at war for ourselves then. we're not at war of ourselves if you're a racist and proud of it and want to distinguish between races and have strong racist views, you are if anything consistent. many of the rest of us are at war for ourselves in that group membership matters even when we think it shouldn't. even when we think we want to be colorblind, we want to be gender-blind, we want to be attractiveness blind, we're still swayed by things. it's an interesting question how to deal with this problem and i think part of the answer is, we can use our intelligence to override our biases. that is, we don't become less biased just by trying to be less bias rather we become less bias by using clever methods to override it. so, for instance, it used to be that for auditions for symphony orchestras, men would be overwhelmingly chosen over women, and because they sounded better according to the judges but it turns out that when you do blind auditions, you have them audition behind the screen, the effect goes away, and a gender difference largely disappears. what's interesting here from a psychological point of view is the judges, male and female who were saying that the men sounded better than the women, were most likely not being self-consciously sexist saying," ha ha i'm going to discriminate against women. i hate women," etc. rather they might have entirely had egalitarian views, but because of their biases, they couldn't help but hear them differently. then when you hide the gender of people, you take away the chance for the biases to operate. things change. more generally, we talked about so many social psychology biases, so many ways in which we're contorted by first impressions, by stereotypes that we believe are inaccurate, by cognitive dissonance. the way we can make it through the world as better decision-makers and better people often is to use our intelligence to structure the world so these biases don't apply. to put it much broader, we can use our heads to override our hearts.
[music] most of us will spend up to a third of our lives at work. we'll spend even longer thinking about work. it's fair to say work is a highly significant part of our lives. and yet, this part of our life is often not as pleasant or meaningful as we would like it to be. have you ever had to deal with a boss who was not a very effective leader? have you struggled to maintain your motivation in light of a job that's boring and under-stimulating? have you found it difficult to get along with a colleague who seems to come from another planet? and have you felt stressed out at work and not really known what to do about it? we all face these issues at times during our working lives. and if you're in a leadership position, you will not only face these challenges in your own work, but you'll be thinking about how to manage other people's work more effectively. how do you get the people you lead to be engaged? how might you approach conflict within your team? how might you create a safe and healthy workplace for your employees? these are a sample of the interesting questions that concern work psychologists. work psychologists aim to use knowledge about psychology to improve people's lives and to help our organisations to be more productive. my name is sharon parker. i'm a professor at the business school and co-director of the accelerated learning laboratory at the university of western australia. in this course, psychology at work, we will show you how to use psychology to understand and improve the work life of yourself and others around you. [music]
i'm sharon parker, and i'm a professor at the business school at the university of western australia. welcome to psychology at work. in 1974 in a book about work, author studs terkel noted work is about a search for daily meaning, as well as daily bread. for recognition as well as cash, for astonishment rather than torpor. in short, for a sort of life rather than a monday through friday sort of dying. work can be wonderful. a source of enjoyment, identity, and connection. and it can be terrible. stifling, boring, depleting. in this course, we apply what we know about psychology to help make work more of the former and less of the latter. we'll start by looking at individuals in the workplace. we need to understand who we are as unique people and what that means for work. for instance, does our cognitive ability and personality affect how we work? what motivates us to work? then, we're going to zoom out a bit and look, not at individuals but at teams and leaders of teams and organisations. nowadays, people often don't work in isolation but in collaboration with others. what makes one team flourish and another team a total disaster. and what makes for a good or even a great leader. we are going to then keep zooming out and look at the actual work itself. what are the tasks that need to be done and how can they be sensibly organised into jobs. not just any old job, but a motivating and non-stressful job. in the very last session, we will look at how organisations create practices and structures to enable work to be safe and healthy. in each of the six weekly sessions, we will introduce you to a topic, and you'll meet a different expert from the university of western australia. although each of us professors have different expertise, we do have something in common. we're all committed to providing you with ideas that are evidence based or grounded in rigorous research, but at the same time, we are all committed to ensuring what we present is practical. so each week, we'll give you some tangible exercises that will help you to understand yourself and others, and ultimately will help make your work better. and not a monday through friday sort of dying. a very warm welcome to psychology at work.
hi, welcome to the first week of psychology at work. are you the sort of person who very reluctantly goes to the work party and then hides in the corner counting the seconds until it's time to go home? or are you someone who can't wait for the work party and wishes there was one every week? everyone is different. we're all unique. you know that. but how do we make sense of that uniqueness? how can we summarise all the many ways we're different to help us understand people? and how can we use that understanding to better fit people to their work? in the first session, dr. patrick dunlop will explore how our uniqueness plays out in work settings and how organisations can use this knowledge to select the very best employees for the job and what happens when organisations use this knowledge about individual differences unfairly. dr. alex luksyte will uncover the harmful impact of discrimination in the workplace.
[music] my name is patrick dunlop, and i'm a lecturer at the school of psychology at the university of western australia. now we all know that people are different from each other. not only in the way that they look, but also in their personalities and abilities. in this series of four videos we will delve into this very interesting topic of individual differences and find out why individual differences are crucially important in organisational settings. in this first video, we'll explore what psychologists mean when they talk about individual differences, and i'll give you an overview of the individual differences that psychologists have studied most extensively. in the second video, we'll delve into what psychologists call cognitive ability and we'll look at what that means in organisational settings. in the third video, we will explore personality and discuss how our personalities play out in organisations. in the fourth video, we will look at how we can use measures of cognitive ability and personality to make better personnel selection decisions. in between the videos, you will be given the chance to do your own cognitive ability and personality assessments, and you will be given feedback on both of these. now, we know that human beings share the same basic form. and yet we can vary in so many different ways. not just in terms of how we look, but also how we feel, how we view the world, what we're good at, what we like doing, and what we don't like doing. we also vary in how smart we are, and how we behave in different situations and psychologists call these variations individual differences. so what can these individual differences tell us about how people approach their work? well, the short answer to that question is quite a lot. and in this course, i want to focus on the two types of individual differences that psychologists have spent the longest time studying. we call these cognitive ability and personality. cognitive ability is also sometimes called intelligence. when psychologists talk about cognitive ability, they're referring to our capacity to learn, reason, problem solve, plan, think abstractly, and comprehend complex ideas. some people have a very high level of cognitive ability. i'd imagine most of us knew at least one person at school, who seemed to ace all of their exams, despite only studying the night before. there's a good chance that that person was very high on cognitive ability. now let's look at the concept of personality. just like that friend of ours, we all have other friends with very strong characteristics. perhaps you know somebody whose always the life of the party. or maybe you know somebody who always seems to be stressed out all of the time. maybe you work with someone who's extremely well organised and reliable. or maybe you work with someone else who's sloppy in their work, and just can't be trusted to complete their tasks on time. psychologists use the word personality to describe how people vary in this way. we can think of personality as being a person's unique and relatively stable patterns of behaviour, thoughts, and emotions. there are many other types of individual differences that are relevant to work, but for now, let's just focus on cognitive ability and personality. the thing to remember is that cognitive ability is what determines our reasoning power and problem solving power, whereas our personality tells us about our behaviour and the types of behaviour we tend to default to. while you're watching this video series, i strongly encourage you to complete the cognitive ability and personality assessments that we've included in this course.
welcome back to our session on individual differences. in this video, we will dig a bit deeper into cognitive ability. we define cognitive ability as a person's capacity to learn, reason, problem solve, plan, think abstractly, and comprehend complex ideas. cognitive ability is also simply known as intelligence. in this video, we'll explore how cognitive ability is structured. we'll talk about how cognitive ability can be measured. and then finally, we'll talk about what cognitive ability can tell us about behaviour in organisations. [music] so how do we visualise the structure of cognitive ability? well, different psychologists have come up with different ways of viewing it. today, we're going to look at a very popular model called carrol's three-stratum theory. at the top of this model, is this thing we like to call g. g represents one's general cognitive ability, and it is thought to drive our overall ability to solve problems. in the second tier of carroll's model, you can see eight families of abilities which are thought of as broad abilities. so examples of these include fluid intelligence, crystallised intelligence, memory, retrieval ability, cognitive speediness, and processing speed. these are thought to be determined partly by g, but they also represent our unique strengths and weaknesses. down at the very bottom you see the highly specific abilities, and these are thought to be driven partly by our broader abilities. all up though, you can see from the model, that there are a great number of specific abilities, but ultimately they are being driven very strongly by this g factor that sits at the top. there are other models of cognitive ability out there, but most of them take on this same basic form, general ability sitting at the top and specific abilities sitting at the bottom. so, how do we measure cognitive ability? well, the answer to that depends a little bit on which model we might use to describe it, but some broad principles do apply. cognitive ability tests normally ask the subjects to solve problems and the type of problem will depend on the type of cognitive ability being measured. a well designed cognitive test should not rely on a person possessing any particular knowledge or skill beyond maybe basic language and numerical comprehension. you can pause a video and take a look at these examples. if you would like to try a full cognitive test you are welcome to complete the test that forms part of this course. how important is cognitive ability for the world of work? well, it turns out to be very important. in 1998, frank schmidt and john hunter summarised over 85 years of research that looked at the relationship between various measures of individual difference that are often used by organisations to make selection decisions and performance on the job. they found that cognitive ability was the single strongest predictor of performance in a very broad range of jobs. here you can see a chart showing the observed relationship between some of the more commonly used selection tools and job performance. and you can see that cognitive ability is the clear winner. other researchers have since confirmed these findings many times and in many different countries. so, it is clear that cognitive ability is important to work, but there are some common myths about cognitive ability in the workplace that i would like to debunk. first, there is the myth that cognitive ability only matters in complex jobs. in other words, there might be some jobs out there that are so simple, that cognitive ability really wouldn't make any difference. well, this turns out not to be true. john hunter looked at how well cognitive ability tests predicted performance in over 500 different organisational roles. the chart shows the relationships hunter observed between cognitive ability on the x axis and job performance on the y axis. the green line shows the relationship between the two that hunter observed in highly complex jobs. unsurprisingly, this relationship is strong and positive. that is, in complex jobs, smarter people tend to perform better. but, hunter also observed quite a strong relationship in jobs of moderate complexity, as the yellow line shows. this was also true even in very simple jobs, as you see in the blue line. the relationship is weaker, but it is not weak overall. so even in relatively simple jobs cognitive ability matters. the second myth we'll look at is this idea that there is some sort of magic amount of cognitive ability. where having more than this magic amount will not actually help you perform any better. but this seems to be wrong too. a study of military personnel suggested that if anything, performance accelerates as cognitive ability approaches very high levels. you can see from this chart that the differences in the slopes as cognitive ability increases is very subtle. but it is reliable, so that myth has been well and truly busted as well. while cognitive ability does show an impressively strong relationship with job performance, it is important to realise that it is only one part of a very complex puzzle. knowing that a person is very smart tells us nothing about how friendly, team oriented, organised, socially engaging, or diligent they are as a worker. to learn about these things, we turn to understanding human personality, which is the topic of the next video.
[music] welcome to our third session on individual differences. in this video, we will explore personality, which you might remember refers to our unique and relatively stable patterns of behaviour, thoughts, and emotions. much like cognitive ability, psychologists have long been fascinated by human personality and have grappled with issues around how to measure it and what its implications are in the workplace. at first glance, the human personality is very complex. it can vary in just so many different ways. so one of the first challenges psychologists faced was to find a way to define the structure of human personality. one very popular method they came up with was to use this concept of personality types. you might have come across personality types before. for example, if you've ever taken one of those online quizzes which asks you which simpsons character are you. the basic idea of this system is that all members of a personality type are similar to each other.. but they're different from members of other personality types. though it's nice to think that we all fall into different types, the reality is that people are far more complex than that. these days, most psychologists prefer to use what we call trait-based approaches to modeling human personality. the basic idea behind the trait-based approach is that there exists a set of dimensions which we call personality traits. each of us sits at a point along all of these dimensions. most people have probably heard of the trait extraversion. people who are very high on extraversion tend to be sociable and outgoing. now, extraversion has been reflected here by the double-headed line. introversion is the opposite of extraversion. it means quiet and reserved. now, the bell curve shows how we vary along that trait. we observe this bell-shaped pattern on almost every trait we have ever measured in psychology. you can see from the shape of the curve that most of us are in the middle part. the further away from the middle we move, the more extreme and rare that level of the personality trait is. this slide shows how we can vary on the trait extraversion, but there are in fact many more of these traits out there. how many traits are there? that is, how many traits do we need to think about if we really want to understand human personality? well, the answer to these questions depends on how deep you want to go. there are perhaps several thousand very narrow personality traits that we might try to measure. but research has shown that human personality can be pretty well summarised by five or maybe six broader personality traits. the dominant five trait model is now known as the big five. and it suggests that people's personality can be neatly summarised by five independent dimensions. these five dimensions are openness to experience, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, and emotional stability. the six trait model, which is known as hexaco, includes an additional dimension called honesty-humility. so, how do we go about measuring human personality? well, over the years psychologists have grappled with this very issue. some older techniques have involved inferring personality characteristics from people's responses to images like the rorschach ink blots or from people's handwriting. but it turns out these methods aren't terribly good. nowadays, psychologists tend to rely on questionnaires. these questionnaires usually involve asking participants to respond to self-descriptive statements. the basic idea is that each of these statements gives us a sliver of information about that person's personality. but together, the statements combine to tell us about their standing on broader personality traits. now, let's look at personality in the workplace. whereas cognitive ability tells us a lot about what a person can do, personality tells us about what a person is willing to do and how they might go about doing it. we can use personality traits to predict many outcomes that are relevant to the world of work. for example, conscientiousness has been shown to predict performance across many jobs and extraversion has been shown to predict performance in jobs like sales or managerial roles. personality can also be used to predict negative work outcomes. for example, people who are less agreeable seem to be more inclined to withdraw from their work and people who are less honest tend to engage in activities like counterproductive work behaviours, like stealing or taking longer breaks. the important thing to remember is that personality tells us about how we typically behave, and so it can affect what we choose to do. quite often, however, it is the situation that determines how we behave. for example, even the most extroverted person will probably stay quiet when in a library and even the least conscientious person will try to work hard when the boss is watching them. in strong situations like these, personality does not determine our behaviour so much. our personality is likely to be most important in situations where we have the freedom to choose how we behave. most modern theories of personality now discuss how situations we face can combine with our traits to predict our behaviour in the workplace. in the next video, we'll explore how we can use our knowledge of a person's cognitive ability and personality to make better personnel selection decisions.
welcome to our fourth and final video on individual differences. in this video, we will discuss how measures of cognitive ability and personality can be used to improve our personnel selection decisions. [music] whenever an organisation is hiring new workers, they're really peering into the unknown. often a hiring manager has very limited information about the applicants who apply for their positions. for example, they might have a cover letter or maybe a resume. or they might have managed to get some information from a referee. at the end of the day, a hiring manager has to make a prediction about how well a prospective applicant will perform on the basis of this limited information. so, let's look at a simplified selection decision model that shows the types of decisions we can make. the green boxes show when we get it right. at the top right, you can see the people who we thought would do well and end up doing well. at the bottom left, you see the people who we thought would do poorly in the job, and they end up doing poorly. these boxes are green because our prediction about these people was correct. the red boxes show the times where our judgment was wrong. sometimes we might overestimate how well somebody will perform and then hire somebody we shouldn't have hired. these are the people you see in the bottom rows. sometimes though, we reject somebody who actually would've done well if they were given the chance. these people are in the top left. in fact, those people often go on to get jobs at our competitors and do great work for them. an organisation's goal in personnel selection is to really maximise the green decisions and minimise those red decisions. so, how can psychological assessments help? well, before we get into that, we first have to talk about the topic of validity. you might remember from the previous videos that i talked about how cognitive ability and certain personality characteristics can make predictions about how well people will perform on the job. well, in personnel selection, an assessment that is a good predictor of future performance, is what we call a valid assessment. to work out what types of assessments are valid, psychologists often turn to the work of schmidt and hunter, which we saw in the earlier video. you'll recall schmidt and hunter synthesised over 85 years of research in personnel selection, and they found several important things. the first i've already described and that was cognitive ability is the strongest predictor of performance in a range of jobs. the second important thing is that the personality trait consciousness also turns out to be a valid predictor of job performance. it also seems that cognitive ability, plus conscientiousness, combine really well to make even better predictions about job performance. based on the work of schmidt and hunter, many industrial psychologists are comfortable making this crude recommendation. when you are selecting new personnel, you should measure your applicant's cognitive ability and their conscientiousness. and you should offer the job to those who are highest on these two traits. in technical terms, this can be expressed as a formula. performance = 0.51 x gma + 0.31 x conscientiousness. you can see how much better the decision making is when this formula is used. the chart on the left shows how well we would do if we picked people on the basis of invalid information, such as how old they are, or what ethnicity they are. the chart on the right shows how we do it when we use the formula. you can see that when we use the formula on the right, fewer people end up in that red bad decisions zone. also, you can see that the bad decisions we do make are not as bad. of course, even when we use the formula, we will still make some bad decisions. unfortunately, this is unavoidable. but over the longer run, we should come out ahead. so that's concludes our series on individual differences, where we learned a lot about how cognitive ability and personalities pan out in workplace settings.
[music] hello, my name is alex luksyte and i am a senior lecturer from the university of western australia business school. discrimination is illegal and costly. it can tarnish an organisation's reputation and harm the well-being of victims, yet it's very prevalent. here is an example. recently an australian hospital rejected an internship application of a 50 year old chinese migrant. he had a master's degree in neurology and 17 years of professional experience, yet they would not employ him. later the hospital was found to be discriminating against this person based on his age and race. there are two types of discrimination. informal discrimination is about displays of negative verbal and nonverbal behaviors. it is also known as everyday discrimination. and formal discrimination is about differential firing, hiring, promotion, and pay. it is usually illegal. the example that i mentioned at the beginning of my lecture is about formal discrimination. so, why do hiring managers make employment decisions based on job irrelevant characteristics such as demographics? this happens because hiring managers make assumptions about applicants' abilities to perform their jobs based on visible demographic characteristics and stereotypes. often, this happens subconsciously. race, gender, and religion are also associated with negative stereotypes, and can lead to discrimination. a recent experiment showed that female job applicants wearing hijabs received fewer callbacks than the same applicants without hijabs. these muslim women received more negative attitudes and less interest from potential employers. informal discrimination like this is problematic because it is not prohibited by law, it is not advert, yet it's effects are profound. there are other types of discrimination, for example, job applicants who are pregnant may be disadvantaged during the selection process. in a famous experiment, researchers ask applicants to apply for a job in a store, either wearing a pregnancy prosthesis or not wearing it. observers then recorded all the verbal and nonverbal behaviors between the applicants and store managers. they found that pregnant candidates received higher rates of interpersonal discrimination. for example, recruiters tried to end conversation prematurely, they were rude, they pursed their lips, and displayed more hostility. so, how can we minimise both formal and informal discrimination in selection? research has unpacked several strategies. here are just two of them. first, job applicants can be more proactive in changing negative stereotypes of themselves. for example, pregnant job applicants can ensure their employers of their flexibility and commitment. second, by increasing diversity, both among employees and customers, organisations will minimise discrimination against ethnic minority applicants. by minimising both formal and informal discrimination in selection, organisations will ensure that they hire the very best applicants based on their qualifications, not their demographics.
[music] hello everyone. i am lena wang and i'm from the accelerated learning laboratory at uwa. i'm the program manager for the psychology at work course. some of you may be wondering, what do you guys do as work psychologists and how do you know if certain practices at the workplace are working or not? well, if you have those questions, that's great because we have purposefully put together a series of short videos for you so that you can meet with one of our researchers each week and learn about all the interesting work and the research we are doing. [music] in this first week, we are very fortunate to have jake buckley who is completing his masters degree in industrial and organizational psychology at the university of western australia. very big welcome jake. >> thanks lena. thanks for having me. >> jake, i know you are working intensively with australian government organisations helping improve the process for selecting firefighters, which is a very interesting project. can you tell us a bit more about this? >> yeah, sure. this organisation is in charge of running an annual recruiting process for selecting new firefighter applicants. >> you have anywhere from between six to twelve hundred applicants for applying for as few as say 50 positions. now in order to be offered a role as a firefighter, these applicants need to move through a multiple stage selection process and what the organisation wanted was a way to objectively measure just how fair candidates found this process to be. now as you can imagine, with such a large volume of applicants moving through each year, it's very important that this organisation is perceived as being fair in their methods. >> sure, that sounds like a very important issue. what did you guys do? >> the study was based around online survey data, so applicants were sent a survey both before and after each selection stage. now, we were interested in a broad range of variables but primarily we were looking at procedural justice, which is about how fair the applicant finds the procedure to be as well as distributive justice, which is about how fair they find the actual outcome to be. we also collected information on a number of other variables just to gain some better insight into some of the personal attributes of the candidates themselves. >> what did you guys find? >> what we found was that the candidates found the process and the outcome of certain selection stages to be less fair than others. >> okay. >> now through some of the other measures we collected, we were able to tease out some of the reasons why and what we found was that candidates found it hard to understand the rationale behind the choice of some of the selection tools. many were unhappy with the way feedback was handled, and there were also some concerns about the overall length of time of the whole process itself. so we were able to take this information and present it directly back to the organisation. i'm very happy to have learned that with this year's current process, they've changed the way they explain a rational behind the selection tools. the way feedback is addressed has completely been overhauled and the entire process from start to finish now takes one third of the time it previously took. >> wow, it's great to actually hear your project leads to the actual improvement of the process. >> very satisfying, i must say. >> yeah, thanks so much, jake, for your time doing this interview with us. it's great to have you. >> oh, thanks a lot, it's been a pleasure. thank you. [music]
well, lately, i've been really interested in recruitment. and recruitment is what we call the process where an organization tries to attract new members. so, recruitment happens before the selection process. so, first, you've got to attract people to apply for positions and then you use selection tools to identify the strongest candidates for the job. now, the project i've been working on at the moment is all about helping volunteer organizations improve their recruitment practices. and what i'm really interested in doing in that project is understanding how messages or information provided in volunteering advertisements attract or affect the sorts of people who are attracted to volunteering roles. now, i'm doing this research with the scouting associations across the country and also some of the emergency services in western australia. well, this work is relevant to any volunteer manager who's involved in recruiting new volunteers. if volunteer managers aren't able to recruit the right people for their volunteering roles, what they may find is that the people they do recruit, need to struggle to perform well in those roles, or they just get fed up and then they leave. and if they leave, that costs time and money in terms of training and re-recruitment and so forth. more research will help volunteer managers write recruitment materials that will help them attract people who fit well with their volunteering roles.
welcome to week three of psychology at work. over the past two sessions we've focused on individual differences, now let's zoom out and look at teams. at work we don't always work alone, much of the time we need to cooperate with other people to achieve shared goals. and when a team works well, it's much more than the sum of the individuals in the team, but when it's working badly lots of time is wasted dealing with arguments and miscommunications. the team is ineffective and people never want to work together again. in this week dr. zhijun chen and dr. alex luksyte will share with you how to make teams more effective.
[music] hi. i'm zhijun chen and i am a lecturer at the university of western australia business school. this session is about how we can use teams to break what we call the expert's curse. experts can be our most powerful teachers. but often they have lost the ability to answer even simple questions accurately. suppose you have $5,000 and want to invest some money? who would you give it to? let me give you three choices. a financial astrologer, an experienced financial analyst and a 4-year-old girl. who would you choose to give the money? in fact, this is a real experiment conducted in 2001 by a uk psychology professor. the astrologer made his choice by examining the formation date of the companies. the financial analyst relied on his seven years of experience. the 4-year-old girl, randomly grabbed four company names from a pile of papers. what do you think the results were? in the first week, the astrologer lost around 10% of the money. the expert lost around 7%. our 4-year-old lost only 4.6%. now after 1 year, this was the result. the global market dropped to 16%. you can see the 4-year-old was the only one who didn't lose any money. you might think this only applies to experts in the world of finance. however, there have been lots of cases where experts and authorities in other fields also made huge mistakes. here are a few examples. so, how can we break the expert's curse? here is an interesting example. it's 1906, plymouth's show in the u.k., a fat ox was selected, competitors bought numbered cards and they wrote down their estimates of what the ox would weigh. those who made the closest guess won the prize. later, scholars discovered that the average guess of all the entrants was remarkably close to the actual weight of the ox. it seemed like the group, combined, had more wisdom than the individual. so why? well, there are many explanations. the one i want to focus on is about grouping people together. in other words, making use of the wisdom of a team. teams can provide more cognitive resources and social emotional support than individuals can. and we do find teams becoming more and more popular in the modern workplace. so, in the following videos we will explore how we can build up stronger and more effective teams.
in the previous video, we talked about how teams have more cognitive and emotional resources than individuals. when team members coordinate and collaborate, they generate better ideas, achieve more objectives, and provide greater services. however, in reality we'll also see many dysfunctional teams. so the question becomes, how can we really benefit from using teams? and this is a topic of this session. [music] first, let's suppose you are attending a friends birthday party. there are around 200 people in the room. suddenly, a fire breaks out. what would you do? most of us would try to run away. unfortunately, there's only one exit available. if everyone rushes for the exit together, it's going to block up. by having everyone move fast, the whole group ends up moving slower. this figure provides a graphic illustration. the green line shows that the leaving time for 200 people drops initially as the average velocity increases. yet, it starts to increases as the average velocity further increases. during this time, the flow of people getting out of the room starts to decrease. eventually, the number of injured people begins to rise. so, the conclusion is, the fastest way for everybody to get out of the room is to move slowly. in some ways this is quite counterintuitive, right? but we find many similar examples in the real world. for instance, on the roads, our failure to coordinate our objectives and behaviors results in traffic jams. however, if we take a look at nature, we see many successful examples where a swarming crowd looks like one large entity. think of a flock of birds, or a huge school of salmon, moving in harmony. sometimes the crowd can be made up of millions of individuals. psychologists call these kind of group a smart swarm. what's the secret of a smart swarm? recent research suggests that these animals conduct adaptive assimilation. that is, they try to adapt their own behavior based on the actions displayed by others close to them. while the whole crowd sometimes becomes leaderless, they act like one cohesive entity. during this process, they make best use of resources individual members provide. can humans do this, and do it effectively? well, for people, smart swarm behavior can be reduced down to three principles. i call them coordination, communication and copy. coordination means, we put collective interest first, rather than personal benefits. it means, we develop a task structure. a schedule and a workflow to achieve our collective objectives by realising that we are interdependent on each other. we also negotiate and constantly communicate with each other to figure out what we need to pay attention to. finally, we try to learn from others and copy their success. during this process, norms, climates, and even cultures begin to emerge. the group stabilises around optimum patterns of behavior, and these patterns become part of the collective memory. in the workplace this is a process that brings about effective teamwork. while it's easy to say, it's never easy to implement a smart swarm. one of the biggest challenges is people in teams often have conflicts. we will talk about that in the next session.
[music] in the previous video we talked about how to make teamwork as a smart swarm and mentioned the three principles, coordination, communication and copy. however in reality, there are often conflicts amongst team members. in fact, conflicts are so ubiquitous that we even see examples in the insect world. scholars at arizona state university found that in the desert, close to their campus, there are two type of ants. ants that eat during the afternoon, and ants that eat during the evening. they both compete for the same food supply. the scholars observed that the evening ants were actually cheating the afternoon ants by silting up the entrance of their nest. this caused the afternoon ants to come out much later than normal, leaving more food for the evening ants. similar situations can be found in teams, as well. for instance, due to poor communication, team members may find they have incompatible goals and become very competitive toward each other. other times, ambiguous rules and scarce resources make it difficult for members to coordinate their behavior. sometimes conflict arises because there's an abusive leader. different forms of conflict can cause huge time loss in business organisations. studies have found managers have to spend 30% of their time dealing with intra-team conflicts. other studies have found 42% of a manager's time is spent on reaching agreement with others when conflicts occur. for employees, 16% of their time is spent on conflicts with supervisors. so why do we have so many conflicts, and how can we resolve them? to answer these questions we need to understand the nature of teamwork. when we work in teams, we need to reach a consensus about what type of emotions are appropriate. we need to specify goals. we need to synchronise timing and sequence. we need to exchange and disseminate information. and we also need to align behaviors and attitudes. and we need to do all these together, but how? some experts say, we can ask team members to do standardised and formalised jobs. in this case, it's very clear what individual members have inputted. and it does reduce conflicts, however, this solution discourages the emergence of creative ideas and it's less useful for teams operating in ambivalent and complex environments. so how can we avoid the inevitable conflict that arises in teamwork? this is where diversity plays a big role. a high level diversity occurs when we find out that other members are different from us. these differences can be their age, gender, educational level, values, beliefs, personal experience or career aspiration. however, if we can value these differences rather than neglect or disrespect them, we can coordinate teamwork better. eventually, we can achieve better team performance and obtain more creative ideas at the same time.
[music] in today's workplace, organisations employ many people from culturally and demographically diverse backgrounds, many of whom are approaching retirement age. women now constitute half of the labour force, and many employees are ethnically diverse. such a growing diversification means that many teams in organisations have lots of employees of differing ages, race, gender, nationality, and culture. is team diversity a good thing, or is it a bad thing? well, research shows it can bring both opportunities and challenges. first, we tend to like people who are similar to us and we treat people who are different from us with skepticism and uncertainty. we naturally tend to categorise others into either in group or out group members based on visible social categories such as age, gender, and race. social psychologists call this tendency social categorisation. according to social categorisation, teams that are too culturally or demographically diverse may find it difficult to work well together. for example, researchers studied management teams in joint ventures that were co-owned by chinese and western companies. they found that in teams where local managers and expatriates formed distinct subgroups there was lots of emotional and task conflict. because of this, managers did not communicate well, made poor decisions which resulted in poor team performance. however, organisations do value diverse teams because they believe that teammates from diverse cultural and demographic backgrounds bring unique perspectives and are able to take an unconventional approach to problem solving. are managers correct in assuming these benefits of team diversity? the answer is yes. there is another theory called information processing theory. it suggests that diverse teams outperform more homogeneous teams. this is because diverse teams have access to the inimitable resources of their diverse team members. it has been shown that when teams have optimal levels of educational and ethnic diversity they make decisions that are more in-depth and of better quality. so how can organisations maximise the benefits of team diversity and minimise its downsides? research has unpacked several strategies. first, organisations should foster collaboration. teams that are rewarded for collaboration tend to pay less attention to the demographic differences of their team members and more to the diversity of their team members' perspectives and ideas. second, having good leadership is a key. visionary leaders are able to improve communication, which is a critical factor in achieving good team performance. third, organisations should create climate for inclusion, where all employees feel respected and supported irrespective of their demographics. if the group believes in supporting diversity, team members will willingly work together and share information with each other. by implementing these strategies, organisations will ensure they reap the benefits of their diverse teams. they will also improve the work experience of their diverse employees and will make a positive impact on the bottom line.
[music] hello, everyone. for this week's meet the researchers series, we're having joseph carpini who is doing his phd at the uwa business school. welcome, joseph. >> thanks for having me. it's a pleasure to be here. >> thank you. joseph, i know you're doing a lot of interesting work in hospitals, particularly looking at how surgical teams work together. can you tell us a bit more about your project? >> absolutely. basically, i think the easiest way to explain the project that i'm doing is to ask a maybe not so easy question. imagine you or somebody you love had to go in for an elective surgery. so, not an emergency where... you actually have a choice about the surgeon you choose. you have two options. the first option is a surgeon who is a technical master but actually, is not very interpersonally skilled at all. the second surgeon is of average skill but quite good interpersonally, so really strong coordination and team abilities. which one would you choose for yourself or somebody you love? >> i think, i might take the first. >> absolutely, i think a lot of us would naturally take the first surgeon, that one with the high mastery but not necessarily interpersonally skilled at all. but there is a growing body of literature that suggests that actually the non-technical skills, communication, coordination are important aspects of surgery. for example, we know that there is approximately a 22% adverse event rate in surgery and in 13% of those cases, there's patient disability, in the long term, about 18 months later. in about 4% of those cases, we see patient mortality. we're not talking about little errors here, we're talking about things that really have a huge impact for patients. the real issue that we find is actually the fact that we don't really understand that much about what causes these errors. what's causing that 22%? >> yeah. >> so that's really where our research sits and we're really trying to understand the interpersonals, the team and the coordination aspect of surgery in order to make surgery safer for patients. more efficient so that we can get more patients in and out of the operating theater, and ultimately, reduce the number of mortalities that occur in surgery. >> wow, this sounds like really interesting but also complicated work. what did you do with the surgical teams exactly? >> you're right, it is a really complicated issue, so we need to address it from a lot of different approaches. basically, what ends up happening is at the beginning of a day, i choose a theater to observe, and i spend the entire day in that theater observing between three and eight surgical procedures. then what ends up happening is throughout the course of the day, i take structured notes on who's talking to who. what are they saying? is there a communication failure? and if there is a failure, what is the observable consequence of it? then what i do at the very end of the day, when everybody's wrapping up, is i chase them down to ask them to do a really short questionnaire. somewhere between five and ten minutes that tries to assess the extent to which they think that there was good communication, teamwork, and how they think they performed technically. what i've ended up doing in the end is that i've collected about 206 surgical episodes, taking notes. i collected over 210 surveys, representing about 64 different surgical teams. all of that, in addition to the over 2,000 pages of handwritten notes that i've taken in theater, in addition to the hospital records that i've received. so to say the least, there's a lot of data involved. >> yeah. i know, joseph, this project is still ongoing but do you have some data or findings you can share with us? absolutely, we have some preliminary finding from our first study that we did. basically, let's think back to that scenario that i presented at the very beginning, with those two surgeons. the first surgeon is the technical master but interpersonally a monster. the second surgeon, not the best necessarily, average skills but is a really strong communicator. our results, thus far, suggest that actually you're better off choosing the second surgeon as that surgeon is less likely to encounter a near miss. a near miss is when something almost goes wrong but doesn't either because somebody said something and interjects or just out of sheer luck. the real kicker, though, is the fact that we know that a near miss oftentimes turns into either a minor or a major complication. that's when something actually does go wrong. furthermore, what we ended up finding was that the extent to which the team perceives strong nontechnical skills, like communication and team work, that was actually a better predictor of those minor and major complications than the team's technical abilities. furthermore, we ended up finding that their ability to coordinate and collaborate with one another was the single best predictor in explaining surgical efficiency. so it turns out that, actually, the second surgeon would probably be the best in terms of patient outcome for the hospital and probably in preventing patient mortality. we're currently in the process of examining some additional variables and to confirm those results using another data set that we've collected but you'll find updates on the centre for safety's website at uwa. >> sounds great, thanks so much joseph. >> thanks for having me. >> thank you. [music]
hi, my name is florian klonek, and i'm a postdoc at the centre for transformative work design, here at university of western australia. [music] imagine you go to the doctor because you're having symptoms that cause you pain and trouble. at the end of the discussion, you realize that your doctor doesn't have clear answer to the symptoms that you're presenting. i mentioned that this is something that rather troubles you because it leaves you with uncertainty and no clear guideline on what to do. what i'm describing here is actually a real problem. we know that there are about 5,000 to 8,000 cases of rare diseases or what we would call undiagnosed diseases. the challenge with those patients is, that the clinicians have to solve the unsolvable. in my research on investigating how solving the unsolvable can be addressed based on restructuring the work design off admissions. and using a team approach of clinical experts, in which they work in an interdependent and interactive way. i'm particularly interested in how teams are implementing behavioral strategies in which they use exploitation, that is, exploiting the common knowledge of their existing knowledge and their skills. but also explorations strategies in which they're gaining perspectives that challenge their assumptions. this is something that i would call team ambidexterity. i want to understand what conditions help these teams to be ambidextrous. in order to do this, i am using a technological app to track the processes of these teams over time, and observe how team phenomena emerged out of these interactions. the results of my research were have to design team structures that will foster innovation. but they will also benefit commissions that operating in the undiagnosed disease program, patients with rare diseases and society at large.
welcome to week four of psychology at work. you are over halfway through the course, well done. last week, we talked about how people work together in teams. teams are most likely to flourish, though, when they are led well. what does it mean to lead people well? having a leadership title doesn't necessarily mean others will follow. it's through their behaviours that leaders gain respect and are able to influence the direction of others. in this week's session, professor kerrie unsworth will explore what behaviours make a good leader.
my name is kerrie unsworth, and i'm an associate professor at the uwa business school. i'm going to be taking you through a short introduction to leadership, innovation, and change. in other words, what happens at higher levels within the organisation. in this first video, we'll be talking about what leadership is, and different types of leadership. then in the second video, we'll move on to when leaders emerge, and what you need to feel like a leader. in the third video, we'll look at the factors that are related to leadership effectiveness before we move on in the final video to looking at how you can make organizational innovation, and change effective. [music] so, what is leadership? i'm sure you've come across lots of different leaders in your life, some of them good, others not so good. spend a few moments now thinking of two leaders that you have known. first, think of a great leader. what was he, or she like? what made them great? now, think of a bad leader that you have come across. why were they bad? what did they do? what made them different to the first leader you thought about? in this session, we're going to be exploring these differences. so, what do the experts think leadership is? well, we've had a large number of definitions suggested over the years, and no strong consensus on an overall definition. however, we can say that leadership is about influence. a leader is somebody who can sway other people's opinions and behaviours. a manager may have a title, but a leader has the influence. the second important element of leadership is that it occurs between a leader, and a follower or a set of followers. if the influencing process occurs amongst peers, then it is a team process, rather than leadership. the last point is that leadership is not just about who or what the leader is. leadership is definitely based on these things, but it also depends on how the followers perceive the leader. for example, if they perceive the leader more as a friend than as a position of power, then they may be less influenced by what the leader says or does. leadership also depends on the context. you're more likely to be influenced by the leader when there's a crisis happening, and you're in a state of flux, though when you're in control and know exactly what to do. so, all of these things contribute to the degree of influence in the leadership process. now that we know what leadership is, we can start to explore the different types of leadership. the first differentiation is one that i hinted at earlier when we talked about the difference between leaders and managers. and this is the difference between formal, and informal leaders. a formal leader is the person who has the title of being the leader of your group. this might be your boss, the ceo of your company, or the leader of your country. everybody knows that this person is the leader because they occupy a formal position. an informal leader is somebody who doesn't have a formal position, but who still engages in an influencing process with followers. for example, martin luther king didn't have a formal leadership position, but he had significant influence over his followers. the same can be said of mahatma ghandi and malala, and others. a ceo recently told me that one of the key leaders in his organisation was the receptionist. her followers were the customers, and potential sponsors of the organisation who talked to her on a regular basis, and she had tremendous influence over them. so, the message here is that you do not have to have a title to be a leader. the last differentiation i want to make between different types of leadership is whether the leadership comes from the front, or from behind. when we think of a leader, we tend to think of a pied piper type, a charismatic person standing on a pedestal, and inspiring us to follow them wherever they go. this is what we call charismatic, or transformational leadership. however, there's another type of leadership that we're beginning to recognise, and that is called servant leadership. in this type, the leader supports the followers from behind. they nurture, defend, and empower their followers, so that they are simply the first among equals, rather than being the person at the front. their motto is that the needs of others come first. neither of these types are superior to the other, generally. they are simply different types that maybe more relevant to some people, and some cultures, than others. so in summary, we have looked briefly at what leadership is, and what it can look like. leadership is influence. and it's influence that can come from being in front, or from being behind. in the next video, we'll look at how leaders emerge.
[music] >> welcome back. in this video, we're going to be talking about what it feels like to be a leader, and how leaders emerge. one key thing to note though, is that leader emergence is very different to leader effectiveness. you might feel like a leader, and everybody else may look to you to be the leader, but that doesn't necessarily mean you'll be a good leader. have a read through these questions, pause the video and think about how you would answer them. if you answered yes to them, then you have a strong leader identity. if you answered maybe, or no, then chances are you don't see yourself as a leader and you have a weak leader identity. research has shown that the more a person believes him or her self to be a leader, the more likely it is that they will take on experiences that develop their skills and that grow their leadership potential. whether you see yourself as a leader or not, depends on how your view of yourself matches up against your view of what a leader should be. remember in the last video when you thought about a good leader. if your view of yourself matches your view of a good leader, then chances are you'll have a strong leader identity and you'll actually become a leader. then, if other people see your behaviours, and these behaviours match what they think a leader should be, then they will act as though you are a leader. reinforcing your own sense of leader identity. so, let's take three examples. jay thinks that all leaders are extroverted. but because he is introverted he thinks that he couldn't possibly be a leader, and he therefore has a weak leader identity. kay is introverted as well. but she realises that although many leaders are extroverted, there are some good leaders who aren't, and who are introverted instead. and when she compares herself against what she sees as a good leader, she thinks that they match. her colleagues also think of her as the leader, even though she is quiet. so she tries out her leadership more and more. ellen, on the other hand, is extroverted, and this matches her view of leaders, so she has a strong leader identity. however, her colleagues see her as domineering, and this does not match their view of what a leader should be like. so, they ignore her attempts to engage in leadership. kay is the only one of the three who will emerge as a leader in the long run. so when it comes to leader emergence, the most important thing is your leadership schema, or what you think a leader should be like. if you think that who you are matches your leadership schema, then you'll have a strong leader identity. if your behaviours match other people's schemas, then they are more likely to let you start becoming a leader. so think about your own leadership schema, and the schema of those around you. understand it, challenge it, but most of all think about how it is affecting your leadership, and the leadership of those around you.
welcome back. in this video we get to the heart of the matter. what makes a good leader? what can you do to improve your leadership? unfortunately there's no easy answer to this, otherwise we'd be surrounded by fantastic leaders. in this video, we're going to look at one of the key theories that has helped us to understand effective leadership. we're not saying it will always be the best form of leadership, but the research evidence is strong and robust. so we know that it often works. [music] full range leadership theory suggests that there are two basic types of leadership, transactional leadership and transformational leadership. transactional leadership is the basic form of leadership, and it's based on an exchange relationship between the leader and the follower. essentially, if the follower works hard, then the leader provides a reward. if they don't, then they're punished. transactional leadership works best when the leader provides clear instructions and enough resources to do the work. when there are rewards contingent on the behavior, and when the leader actively monitors the performance to make sure that any errors or reduced performance is caught at the right time. now, transactional leadership tends to get a bit of a bad rap, but actually this is a fundamental part of leading. an effective leader is somebody who does all of these things. so what is transformational leadership? well, once you've got the basics down, and people know what they're doing, and they're reinforced for doing the correct behaviors through transactional leadership, then we can start to motivate them through other means. transformational leadership is comprised of four elements, or what we call the four is. individualised consideration, intellectual stimulation, inspirational motivation, and idealised influence. individualised consideration is about knowing who your followers are as individuals, and developing their skills and knowledge. intellectual stimulation means that you're challenging your followers, giving them difficult and complex tasks, and encouraging creativity and innovation. inspirational motivation is about setting a vision and linking that to the day to day goals of the group. and about being optimistic and enthusiastic. finally, idealised influence was originally called charisma and involves standing up for what you believe in, discussing your values and your ethical stances. so, in summary, leader effectiveness is about both managing people and inspiring them. followers need to know what to do, and have the resources to complete the task. but to be a great leader, you also need to transform people so that they want to do the work. it's not easy but it'll certainly pay off for you.
[music] in this last video of this session, we're going to talk briefly about how you as a leader can deal with organisational change. leaders face many challenges in today's workplaces. and one of the key challenges is to make sure that the many organisational changes that are occurring are done effectively. so how do you do this? the first thing to understand and remember as a leader is that resistance to change is not a bad thing. it is a completely rational response that moves through denial and resistance to exploration and commitment. there are lots of reasons why people will resist change. maybe they've had a previous experience with change that hasn't gone well. maybe they're happy with the status quo. maybe there's a potential for losing money, and there's an economic threat. or maybe there's a threat that they might fail personally, or that they might lose status or power. your job as a leader is to enact the change in such a way that your employees move through the process as quickly and as easily as possible. so how do you change the organisation so that you get good outcomes with minimum resistance? the first thing you have to do is to let people know why the change is needed. these days, there is so much change occurring that people are, often rightly, suspicious of impending changes. but let people know what was wrong with the old way and why the new way will help them. set a clear vision for what the organisation will look like after the change has occurred. let people see that you have thought through the long-term and the short-term consequences of the change, and that you have evaluated the need for it comprehensively. next, communicate, communicate, communicate. tell people when things are going to happen. tell them when they are happening. and tell them what you have achieved to date. uncertainty lies at the root of many fears about change. so provide your employees with as much information as you can. making the change feel like a success will always lead to greater effectiveness than making it feel like a failure. while you are communicating, make sure you acknowledge and celebrate the small wins. of course you always need to be honest about any setbacks. but remember your transformational leadership skills. and be optimistic and enthusiastic about overcoming the challenges. so, what can we learn from this? leaders make effective change when they recognise that resistance is natural. develop a vision, communicate, and celebrate. and now you can celebrate. celebrate your new knowledge of leadership.
[music] hello everyone. for this weeks meet the researcher series we're having darja miscenko who's completing her phd at uwa business school. welcome darja. >> thank you for inviting me, being apart of this course. >> thank you. darja is doing a lot of really interesting work, focusing on leader identity. darja, what made you interested in this topic? >> so about three years ago, i was tutoring in the leadership course and during one particularly interesting discussion with a student, i realised they don't perceive themselves as leaders. and that made me really worried, because how can they lead someone, being a manager, in their life, if they don't feel like it. so i decided to focus my phd on figuring out how we can help them to achieve this leader identity. >> so, what did you do in your phd? >> initially i conducted two longitudinal studies. so i put the students through a seven week development program, where they learned the textbook leadership stuff, but also write a leadership diary, which makes them self-reflect on their own leadership. and, i tracked their leader identity for those seven weeks and also did the follow up six weeks after the course ended. >> cool. so, what did you find? >> i find this really peculiar pattern of identity development which looks like a j shape. so what happens is, first they feel less secure about themselves as leaders. >> okay. >> and then a few weeks into the course, we actually see this pattern changing and becoming an upward. i think this can be easily explained because people become more doubtful about their leadership. when they start, they see these great examples of leaders, and they doubt themselves. but then later, because they do so much self reflection, they understand, oh, i am actually a leader. and then we see their identity becoming stronger as well. >> yeah. that's super, so what advice would you give to people who really want to be a leader, but don't yet have the strong leader identity. >> so another thing that i find is that six weeks after, there is a group of people who actually retain the stronger sense of identity. and the difference is that those people actually kept practicing after the course ended. so my advice would be, is to practice your leadership whenever you can, in training or at work, even with your family. and then, you know the principle, fake it till you make it? that really applies here, just do it. >> sounds great, thanks so much darja for sharing with us your interesting research. >> thank you. >> thank you. [music]
i've been recently working on a number of projects, recently ranging from whether religious humility breeds follower tacticity, which will return positive enhancers those followers job performance to whether or not subordinates, minute subordinates can have an impact over the decisions made by the power holders. that being said, today, i want to talk about different project in more detail, which explores the role that gender bias might play in leadership hiring. specifically, with my quarters from bocconi university in milan, and kellogg school of management in us. we initially found that some decision makers, not all, might exhibit gender bias when they describe a leadership position to a male versus female candidate much before anyone was actually offered a job. importantly or more specifically, those individuals or the male candidates were more likely to receive a positive description, a more positive description of the leadership position by those who embody a conservative ideology than their female counterparts. whereas, those individuals who embody liberal ideology oriented or in other words, liberals, they describe those positions equally positively to both male and female candidates. well, in an effort to explain his findings, my quarters and i, we argued that the reason why conservatives do show this bias might be because women in power may pose a threat to the current functioning of the society or organizations, whereas men mostly dominate the operation norms for organizations. the next logical step, we ask ourselves if the trait perceptions or if the trait is the mechanism what drives this effect. yes, ourselves whether or not liberals would show a similar bias once they are checked. across two different studies, one experimental, one large field study, we actually did demonstrate that liberals also show a very similar gender bias against women when describing a leadership position much before anyone is offered a job, but also, they acted very similarly when they have been threatened, and acted personally as conservators did. well, the good news is more and more companies started relying on software such as [inaudible] to screen for bias language in their job postings. specifically, they make sure that they do not use overly melting words. importantly, the implementation of this software actually helped these organizations to attract approximately 30 percent more applications from female candidates. this, of course, doesn't speak to the efficiency effectiveness of this software, but also, we believe that it's a step in the right direction to create equal opportunities for both men and women in our organizations. hence, while our research supports such initiatives, we also want to caution the decision makers and practitioners subtle differences in the overall description of those leadership positions, maybe actually off-putting to some candidates irrespective of their gender.
welcome to the final week of psychology at work. across the globe, over 1 million people die each year as a result of work accidents. this is an incredible, and alarming statistic. every single year, 1 million people go to work, and don't come home to their families. and work stress is a growing problem. in australia, a recent estimate is that work stress costs more than $14 billion per year. in this last session, we'll look at the important topic of organisational, safety, and health. this is a complex issue, it's not just about selecting the right people, but also shaping the team and organisational practices to create the right culture. mark griffin, professor at the school of psychology and director of the center for safety university of western australia will share with you his insights.
hi everyone. i'm mark griffin, and i'm a professor of psychology at the university of western australia. in this series, we will explore the topic of organisational safety, and health. in particular, how can we create a safe, healthy, and productive workplace for all employees. in the first video, we'll focus on safety. in the second, we'll look at health, and stress at work. and in the last video, we'll look at why creating a safe, and healthy work environment is important for organisations. [music] every employee wants to know they can return home healthy, and well at the end of their working day. however, for many types of work there can be a serious risk of harm through accident and injury. hazards that may cause harm come in many forms, physical, chemical, biological, psychological. the risks individuals face from these hazards might range from a minor injury after tripping on a computer cable to multiple fatalities from explosions in a gas plant. psychology's early involvement with safety, included a search for the accident-prone person. it was thought that some individuals were more likely to experience accidents than others. and we can all think of someone who seems clumsy, and prone to an accident. however, research has failed to identify such a type of person. despite the advances in psychology to assess individuals and understand them, the notion of an accident-prone person seems to be a myth. if an accident-prone personality is not the basis of safety at work, what factors are important? safety is usually a combination of human actions, and the surrounding system of management and technology. consider the example of a trainee pilot who fails to react to a critical alarm on the instrument panel. why does this happen? is it because the pilot is distracted by other lights on the panel, or was the instrument panel poorly designed. perhaps, the training did not convey how to respond to the alarm. going a step further, was the training inadequate because there were too few skilled trainers? or the budget did not pay for enough training sessions? you can see from this example that many factors can contribute to safety errors and accidents. in fact, investigations, and the study of safety failures is one of the main ways to learn about the psychology of safety. let's look more closely at how we learn from safety failures. the first way of learning comes from studying individual accidents, and injuries in the workplace. individual accidents lead us to better understand the types of errors that people make in the workplace. fatigue, lack of motivation, and inattention are individual factors that might increase errors at work. the second basis for learning is major disasters in the workplace. in 1984, over 8,000 people died from exposure to toxic chemicals following the explosion of a pesticide plant in bhopal, india. in 2005, a texas city oil refinery exploded, killing 15 people, injuring hundreds more, and threatening the local community. major accidents like these have lead to a better understanding of process failures that involve many people, multiple decisions, and various technical and engineering activities. major disasters teach us how many systems of management technology and engineering come together at a particular point in time, and result in tragic outcomes. for example, communication breakdowns are often a key factor in diverse failures, such as plant explosions, medical errors, and railway crashes. the key message is that the psychology of safety in hazardous environments, involves both individual actions, and the way the work environment is designed and managed. let's look at the workplace in this picture. psychology helps to maintain safety by finding ways to ensure the operators maintain vigilance, and attention to their task. the equipment is easy to use, correctly, and difficult to use, incorrectly. there's good communication between the two operators. the management of the workplace have skills and commitment to support safety, and there is good communication between operators, managers, and other groups in the supply chain. the production and safety goals of the company support each other, and don't conflict with each other. some of these activities are more easily observed than others. over the years there have been trends for psychology to focus either on the individual, personal aspects of safety, or the system process aspects of safety. however, only together do they ensure safe individual actions within safe management, and technical systems.
[music] can the workplace influence our health and well being? there's strong evidence that the quality of our work place has long term effects on our mental and physical health. in particular, workplace stressors, the factors that cause stress, can produce psychological outcomes such as anxiety and depression. and psychologists refer to these as strain. at any one time, up to 20% of the workforce can be experiencing high levels of stress. over time, workplace stressors can result in physical outcomes such as heart disease, back pain and reduced immunity. the national cost of work stress is measured in billions of dollars. so the first step towards managing workplace stress is to understand what causes stress. here are some things psychologists have shown contribute to stress at work. a lack of good leadership, supervisors who don't support employees, unfairness, for example, being paid different rates for the same work. a lack of recognition, being ignored when you're doing your best. and organisational change, for example being allocated new responsibilities without being given a reason. extended periods of these stressors can result in worker burnout as well as long term health problems, such as heart disease. let's look more closely at one of the common workplace stressors, role conflict. role conflict occurs when our job requires us to do tasks that conflict with each other. for example, a salesperson might be expected to build a strong relationship with existing customers, yet also focus on finding new customers. these expectations conflict with each other, creating anxiety and distress. perhaps you've experienced this kind of conflict yourself. in complex organisations such as hospitals, there are many conflicting expectations. a nurse, for example, might be dealing with expectations of a nursing manager, medical specialists, the hospital administrators, and other nurses, not to mention the patients. this type of role conflict arises in many jobs and can cause anxiety and negative feelings about work. so let's look at how people respond to role conflict. psychologists have identified four approaches we typically take. the first approach is about assessing our ability to cope with the environment. this involves our basic human tendency to quickly recognise threats, stressors, and then judge or assess whether we can cope with the stressor. a second perspective focuses on the different ways we might think about the stressors. psychologists have found that it makes a big difference whether we see stressors as a challenge or hindrance. if we perceive role conflict as a challenge to be solved it's not so stressful. on the other hand, when role conflict is perceived as a hindrance, a threat or an unmanageable problem, then we feel anxious and distressed. it is healthier for people to perceive stressors as a challenge. but can we support such a change in perception? a third approach concerns how much control we have, or think we have, in our work environment. control means that we have the autonomy to change the way we work. choosing when to start the work day, or which order to do the day's tasks are simple forms of control. autonomy like this is a powerful way to help people have a stronger sense of control. then, when they experience role conflict, they have more options to deal with the conflict, and experience less work stress. the fourth approach concerns our level of personal resources. personal resources include our energy levels, our ability to recover, and positive work experiences during the day. for example, someone who has not slept well or doesn't have the support of their supervisor won't manage role conflict very well. on the other hand, someone who is mentally alert or working in a supportive environment will manage role conflict much better. what we learn from all these approaches is the importance of employees being able to change the way they work. the individual skills and organisational resources that enable people to grow their jobs are now receiving a great deal of attention from psychologists. as ways to reduce work stress and improve the quality of our work life.
[music] health and safety are intrinsically important to everyone. they're fundamental needs which everyone wants to protect and enhance. the profession of occupational health and safety specialist, is an important and growing career pathway in many industries. but, how do health and safety help the organisations in which people are working? psychology's answered this question from a number of angles. let's look at two of these. first, there's the cost perspective. this tells us that individuals who are injured or unwell will be less effective at work. further, injury or illness that takes an individual out of the work place, creates new costs for the business. there's a cost of replacing the sick person, selecting and training a new person to fill that role. in some cases there may be compensation payments and other costs for the person away from work. and there can be substantial legal implications if the business is responsible for an accident or a health problem. even if the sick or injured employee does come to work, there can be significant costs. sick people may not be able to work effectively, and they can even detract from their team's effectiveness. this is called presenteeism. finally, there can be substantial reputational costs for a business that is seen not to care for its people, or to put its workforce in danger. does anyone really want to work for a company that hurts its people? so simply from the cost perspective, improving the health and safety of the workforce is important to protect the bottom line. in addition to this cost perspective, there's a growing awareness that health and safety also play a role in business growth and development. this is because active and healthy individuals, are more engaged and more energised at work. they not only feel physically safe, but are free to identify the risks and hazards in the workplace, and free to speak up and improve the work environment. people in this active state not only work more effectively for longer periods of time, they're also more dynamic and more creative. they tend to create new ideas and find new ways to solve problems. these are exactly the characteristics needed by organisations to build a competitive edge in the modern market. so we've looked at two major benefits of protecting the health and safety of employees, and promoting their active engagement. it's a way for businesses to save costs, and it's a way to help create an adaptive business that can meet the challenges of the new economy.
[music] hello everyone. for this week's meet the researcher series, we're having dr. laura fruhen from centre for safety at the university of western australia. welcome laura. >> hi lena. laura has done lots of research in the area of safety, and she has been working with many organisations in industries such as oil and gas, mining, aviation, etc. and i know one of the projects laura is working on concerns this concept of safety intelligence, which is really interesting. can you tell us a bit more about it, laura? >> sure, so in this project we were interested in understanding the personal characteristics or individual attributes of senior managers that make a difference for safety and support them in having an influence on safety. and we developed the concept of safety intelligence to capture senior managers' knowledge, as well as skills related to safety issues. and we investigated this concept then involving attribute management organisations from 13 different countries across europe as well as northern america. and we had a total of 148 senior managers participate in our studies, either by completing questionnaires, or by taking part in research interviews. >> so who are these senior managers and why do you choose to study them? >> so the individuals we studied are the most senior people in organisations, in that they were either ceos or their direct report. and we knew from previous research, as well as accident investigation reports from various industries, that they have a very particular role for safety and a strong influence on it. for example, the exxon investigation report following the deepwater horizon drilling accident that occurred in 2010 in the gulf of mexico emphasised that senior managers' commitment to safety will be critical to prevent such accidents in the future. and while we knew they have a very important role for safety, we didn't actually know much about what they need to know or be able to do to exert a positive influence. so in our research, we were really trying to understand what those things are and answer the question of what senior managers need to be able to do and to know. >> mm, that's interesting, so what did you find? >> so we found that particularly safety knowledge, social competence, as well as problem solving skills, are really important for senior managers to have a positive impact on safety. out of the three, problem solving stood out especially, as it was the only one connected to the ability of senior managers to demonstrate their commitment to safety. for example, it was really important that senior managers are able to look at safety problems from many angles when they're trying to understand a problem. it is really important that they come up with multiple ideas how to solve a problem. so in our guidance to the senior managers we also emphasised both types of skills. >> mm-hm, that's very useful to know. thanks laura for sharing your insight with us. >> well thanks for having me lena. >> thank you. [music]
the project i'm working on at the moment is around safety leadership, for people who have either a safety leadership role formally or who manage groups and are responsible for safety. safety leadership is about how people in a formal leadership role, either about safety or just any role of leader, in potentially hazardous environment. what they do to be effective and how they manage their team? it really started from the question of, is safety leadership different to any other form of leadership? we very much taking approach, no it's not. it really is leadership plus a clear responsibility for the safety and risk in the environment. so, we've looked back over all the leadership. research for 50 or more years. we've looked at all the research around safety. i've been developing a way of thinking about what someone who is good at making a workplace safe. what is it they do? how they lead other people to be safe? we've come up with essentially four key sets of behaviors, or actions, or goals that people undertake to be successful. how much really interesting about these four actions is that they're very different. the first of those behaviors is really about encouraging and motivating people to be safe. this involves both seeing the positive benefits of safety. coming home from work and helping out team members. really seeing it as something valuable to work toward is making a better life for everyone. almost in opposition to that, and what people often think typically as a safety role is in preventing bad things happening. so, we think of a second way of defending against all the risks that people face on mine sites, of falls of heavy equipment, all the things that could put you at risk. we need to be vigilant for respond to anything wrong. so, we see safety leadership as being responsible for both quite a positive approach motivation style of leadership, and also quite a risk averse. so, they're quite different things. the third way is perhaps what we typically think of management of just insuring a place is fair. the people understand the rules and consequences, and how doing a job well is effective. the fourth set of behaviors, which applies to all workplaces particularly for safety oriented, is around changing and adapting what we do as we learn. so, those four kinds of behaviors, motivating enthusing people, being vigilant and stopping risks, being fair and consistent, but also changing and learning. create quite a broad set of behaviors that are important for the overall safety of an organization. work on safety leadership is being developed in collaboration with a whole range of industries where there are risks, risks obviously in aviation and mining, where there may not be so obvious. we also work with companies and government departments to improve safety leadership and safety. we do that by asking questions and surveys of people of what they're doing and how they're doing it. linking that with other kind of data, such as injury reports, and overall statistics about the effectiveness of an organization, but also by helping work groups to improve how they work together and how their leadership operates. this training program development is being used in a variety of small and medium-sized businesses right across the state. i think that's really important to note that it's done with coordination between the research groups, the companies who are participating in the training, and the government responsible for regulating safety and for ensuring the safety benefits across the state. so, i think that's a really good example of how the research ties into application, and they both support each other.
well done, you have completed psychology at work. we hope you've enjoyed this course and that you've learnt something you can carry with you throughout your working life. we hope we've inspired you perhaps to investigate work psychology some more. or perhaps to take some action to make your own work and the work of others just a little bit better. this course will be most useful to you if you give it a go. we'd love to hear about your experiences applying what you've learnt. join the accelerated learning laboratory group on linkedin where you can share your ideas. we'll also update you about new research and ideas for practice. good bye from all of us. we wish you a productive, healthy, and happy work life. as we say in australia, have a good one.
welcome to week two of psychology at work. this week, we will delve further into how individuals differ, this time by focusing on what motivates us. have you ever thought about why some people are eager to pursue some tasks, but actively avoid or procrastinate doing others? and what keeps people going once they've started a task? when do they choose to give up? you'll find answers to these questions in this session from professor marylene gagne.
[music] hello, my name is marylene gagne and i'm an associate professor at the university of western australia. i'm interested in understanding what motivates people at work, so i've conducted a lot of research on this topic. today, i will explain to you what motivation is. and in the next videos, i will explain what affects work motivation, so you can better understand your own motivation and performance at work. performance at work is essentially determined by two things. a person's knowledge and abilities and his or her motivation. so, a person will be able to perform if they have the necessary skills and knowledge to do a certain task. these can include cognitive abilities, physical skills and knowledge acquired through education and experience. but without the will to do the tasks, skills and knowledge alone won't lead to performance. both ability and motivation are essential for you to perform well on your job. so, what is motivation? motivation is described as the direction, intensity and duration of behaviour. the direction of behavior is indicated by choices a person makes. for example, between two activities. so, imagine that you had a choice between preparing an agenda for a meeting or working on a report, which one would you choose? if you chose to work on the report, we would assume that your motivation to work on the report is greater than your motivation to work on the meeting's agenda. this greater motivation could be from a preference for writing reports, but it could also be, because you have a looming deadline. intensity of behaviour is another indicator of motivation. for example, if you put in a lot of physical effort to lift weights in a gym, it's an indication that you're very motivated to exercise. finally, the duration of a behaviour is also indicative of motivation. the longer a person spends on an activity or the more they persist in the face of obstacles indicates high motivation for this activity. there are many ways to measure motivation. the first way is to measure peoples' behaviours. you can, for example, measure how much time people persist on a task, whether they persist or give up in the face of obstacles or you can measure reaction time with faster reaction times indicating more motivation. you can also look at nonverbal signs, such as facial expressions and body posture. usually when people look happy, focused and attentive, it indicates high motivation. eye movements can also be useful. it can tell you what the person is paying attention to, while blinks indicate shifts of attention. pupil dilation also indicates interest. leaning the body in conversation and keeping an open posture indicates interest as well, whereas crossing your arms and turning your body away from a person or object indicates lack of interest or even a motivation to avoid. another way to measure motivation is to ask people to report on it. companies often use engagement surveys, because they want to have a pulse on their employees' motivation. such surveys can ask questions about what motivates people to work? what goals or expectations they have or why they do their work? this is by far the most frequently used method for assessing work motivation, but its effectiveness is a bit limited. motivation is influenced both by the person's disposition and by the environment. some people are generally more motivated across different activities than other people. they put a lot of energy into everything that they do. so to get motivated employees, an organisation could try to select the most naturally motivated candidates or the ones that are most genuinely interested in the work that they are being selected for. however, the work environment can significantly affect employee motivation. the way jobs are designed, for example, can make them more or less interesting and stimulating. but other things such as managerial and leadership styles, compensation systems and feedback can also significantly change a person's work motivation. for this reason, selecting employees that are motivated is not sufficient. it's very important to know how to set up a work environment that keeps these workers motivated.
[music] in this video, i will talk to you about the importance of goals for motivation. it's very important for people to have goals to be motivated. so one important theory in psychology is goal setting theory. it was developed by edwin locke and gary latham. according to them, a goal is a purpose or an intention that serves two aims. first, it helps people focus their attention on information that is important to meet their goals. second, it defines what needs to be done. any form of deliberate or a voluntary action is driven by a goal. when you make your breakfast in the morning, you have to decide what you're going to eat and how you will prepare it. this is goal setting. so, goal setting involves two phases. the first one is the deliberation phase. and this is the process of choosing what goal to pursue. the second one is the implementation phase. and it's the process of choosing how to pursue the goal. goal setting theory provides guidelines on how to set goals so that you can maximise your goal attainment. there are four guidelines to follow, and i will describe each of them. the first one is that you need to set specific goals. because specific goals lead to higher performance than vague or broad goals. second, goals that are challenging are more motivating than easy goals. that's because we need to feel stimulated to be motivated. so, what you need to do is to set a goal that is just above your current skill level. third, goal commitment is very important. people usually commit to goals when they have set them themselves, as opposed to having them imposed on them by other people. in the workplace, sometimes goals can be self-selected, but often times, they are set by the employer or the manager. a good compromise is to set goals participatively. so the employer may want you to pursue a particular goal. but, how to pursue it can be discussed. the fourth thing that is really important for goal setting is to receive feedback. feedback can be both positive and negative. positive feedback is highly motivational and it's even been shown to be more powerful than monetary rewards in motivating employees. good positive feedback informs you not only about how you're progressing but more specifically about what you're doing right. for example, your boss could say something like, you did a good job, but that doesn't tell you what was good about your performance. instead, your boss could say, the way you spoke to the client was good. it made the client feel more comfortable and this is probably why you got the sale. this not only informs you about what behavior was effective, but it also points out the consequences of that behavior. and you'll be more likely to repeat this behavior in the future by receiving information like this. negative feedback can be more demotivating, especially if it focuses on the lack of competence and you feel that this cannot be fixed. but it's sometimes necessary to give negative feedback when employees are not performing up to standards. so in this case, it's important to give constructive negative feedback that focuses on the behaviour to be changed instead of the person. and it's also important to show the person how that behaviour can be changed. these four guidelines can serve you in terms of when you want to motivate yourself, as well as when you want to motivate other people, such as your subordinates. in the next video, i will talk about how quality of motivation matters to performance.
[music] in this video, i will explain that there are different types of motivation that affect performance and well being. renown psychologists edward deci and richard ryan developed self-determination theory, which distinguishes between different types of motivation. generally speaking, we can talk about intrinsic motivation and extrinsic motivation. intrinsic motivation is when you do something because it's fun. a good example of this is a child playing with a toy. children play with toys, not because they are being rewarded for it, but simply for the pure enjoyment of playing itself. this is intrinsic motivation. the other type is extrinsic motivation and this can sometimes be a more controlling type of motivation. for example, if you do something to obtain a reward or to avoid a punishment. however, extrinsic motivation can also be autonomously driven. a good example of that is giving blood. giving blood is not something that's really fun to do. so it's not intrinsically motivating. but people usually do it because they find that it's the very important thing to do. for this reason, we call this extrinsic autonomous motivation. there are two types of motivation that lead to the best performance and well-being outcomes. intrinsic motivation and extrinsic autonomous motivation. in other words, if you do something because you enjoy it or you find it meaningful, you're more likely to perform better and to feel better. you're likely to have more energy and to put more energy into your work. on the other hand, if you work only for the paycheck, you're less likely to perform well and you're more likely to burn out. to get long lasting motivation, you need to enjoy your work or at least find it meaningful and important. so how can managers help their employees get more enjoyment and meaning out of their jobs? employees need to feel three things in order to be well motivated. they need to feel competent, autonomist and related to others. people feel competent when they feel that they are able to master their environment. you can make employees feel more competent by matching their skills and knowledge to what is required to do a good job. people feel autonomous when they feel that what they are doing reflects who they are. and not having a sense of pressure. you can make employees feel autonomous by asking them for their opinions and by encouraging them to participate in decision making. employees will also feel autonomous when they are given good reasons to engage in an activity. so you can explain the importance of their work. for example, by explaining how their work impacts other people so they find it more meaningful. finally, because we are social animals, we need to have meaningful and trustful connections with others to thrive. you can make employees feel related to others by giving them opportunities for social interactions in the workplace. that can be achieved through teamwork, social events, and more interactions with clients. as a manager, it's also important to listen and to be empathic with your employees. research has shown when organisations do these things, they're more likely to have engaged employees, who have better well being and are more likely to stay in the organisation.
[music] hello everyone, for this week's meet the researcher series, we're having francesco cangiano from uwa business school, where francesco is pursuing his ph.d. welcome. >> thank you lena. >> francesco we know that there are three types of motivations we need to feel at work in order to feel satisfied. we need to feel autonomous, competent and feel related to others. and i know you've been doing research in this area, looking at how these types of feelings can affect people's psychological well-being. can you tell us a bit more about your project? >> yes, sure. sure lena. so we were interested in investigating how feeling competent autonomous related at work affects our well-being. more specifically, we wanted to look at individual fluctuations of well-being over time. and to do so, we conducted this research using part time mba students who were working full time, and we have asked them to complete three short daily surveys. one before going to work, one when they were at work, and a final one in the evening, before going to bed. and we have asked them to complete these short surveys on their smartphones for the duration of the working week. we wanted to understand how our daily work experiences affect whether we come back to work tired and exhausted the following day. >> so what did you find? >> we found that the need for competence seems to be particularly important for our well-being. on days in which participants reported being more competent, they were also less fatigued and more energised in the evening, as opposed to days in which they did not feel competent. and what's perhaps even more interesting is that, working longer hours didn't necessarily result in being more fatigued for them. as long as they felt competent doing their work. and i guess the takeaway message is that, we should strive to engage in activities that make us feel competent on a daily basis. feeling incompetent at work can lead to increased fatigue and exhaustion and from a managerial perspective i think mangers should try and give their employees more autonomy and allow them to engage in activities that help them utilise their skills and abilities. and, although these activities can be a little challenging, we know that these have a boosting effect on our well being, and can help us replenish our batteries, recharge our batteries, and help us deal with a demanding job. >> that's really useful to know. so what do you plan to do next in your research? yes, we are currently conducting a follow-up study, looking at more objective indicators of well being and stress. for example, we are using heart rate variability monitors to investigate the physiological effects of our daily work experiences. as you might be aware, the overwhelming majority of research in occupational well-being relies on subjective indicators of well-being, subjective evaluations of well-being. that is we ask people how they feel, but we don't really know their physiological responses. and i guess this is exactly where we want to move forward, the evidence. >> thank you francesco, for sharing your interesting research with us. >> thank you lina, my pleasure. [music]
welcome to week five of psychology at work. in my role as a researcher and as an organisational psychologist, i've talked to thousands of people carrying out many different jobs. sometimes people love their work, they're thriving. other times they hate it, they're dying a slow death every day. you might expect the people who love their work to be doing the high status, high paid professions, like law or medicine and the people who hate their work to be on the other end of the pay status spectrum. but this is not so. i've talked to lawyers who hate their work because every minute of their job has to be charged to an account. i've also talked to home cleaners who love the freedom of their jobs, and who get a great sense of pride helping busy families clean their homes. what i've learned is that how people feel about their jobs is not so much to do with the occupation that they're in, but how their work is structured or designed. work design is my topic this week. additionally, dr. alex luksyte will be talking about a particular issue that's relevant to work design and that is employees' feelings of over qualification.
[music] work design is about the content of tasks, activities, and responsibilities that people have in their job. as well as, how those tasks, activities, and responsibilities are organised. for example, think about the job of a nurse, and imagine you are designing a new nursing job. questions you might ask, include which task should the nurse do? how much patient care should there be relative to paperwork? which tasks should be allocated to doctors, or other medical professionals? which decision should the nurse make? and which should be made by the nurse manager? should the nurse be expected to work as part of a team? and if so, who else should be in the team? these are all work design questions. often, we don't think much about them because the job is already designed. sometimes it's only when symptoms of poor work design emerge. like high levels of burnout, or lots of talented people leaving the job that we start to ask these sorts of questions. when describing work design, we often talk about job characteristics. this is a short hand way of summarising important aspects of work design that we know affect people's health, well-being, and performance. as an example, one job characteristic is skill variety, or how much a job uses a range of different skills. you can imagine that most of the time the job of a nurse involves several different competencies. practical skills like moving patients out of their bed, emotional skills like supporting sad families, and administrative skills like maintaining patient records. we would describe most nursing jobs as having high skill variety. skill variety is one important job characteristic. we'll look at other job characteristics in the next video. let's talk about why work design is important. our work design has a major impact on how we feel at work. it affects our job satisfaction, how committed we are towards our company, even our happiness. listen to this portfolio worker talking about how her work design affects her feelings. she says, i love how i get to make my own decisions. i work hard to satisfy my clients, and at the end, i feel this great sense of achievement that it's been down to me. work design also affects how we behave at work. listen to how this finnish hotel cleaner describes her lack of variety in her work, and her lack of autonomy. i often have more than 30 rooms to clean in exactly the same way, which makes the job monotonous. what i dislike most, though, she says, is the stress due to a very pressed time frame. we have maximum 18 minutes to finish a room, regardless of how much effort each room needs. i often meet cleaners running between rooms to be able to keep up. one of the consequences of this poor work design was that the cleaners began to steal. the thefts became a positive trait of our working day as we get something else to think about other than the boring work tasks. stealing has become a game, and through it we have found some meaning in work. i regard these occasions of eating stolen chocolate as possibilities to take back time and energy that we give away all the time, but never get properly compensated for by the greedy hotel. so, we see the cleaners behave counterproductively to compensate for their poor work design. work design can even affect our physical well-being. i've conducted research on cyber security agents whose job it is sometimes to sit and watch the screen, for up to eight hours a day with very little rest. this causes great problems for their lower back, and for their eyes. so, work design affects how we feel and behave, and our physical and mental health. it also affects the productivity of the organisations we work for. there's one further reason why work design matters. in many countries, good work design is required by law. in australia, the work health and safety act states that, workers and others should be given the highest practical level of protection against harm to their health, safety, and welfare from hazards and risks arising from work. in other words, if, as an employer you design work that causes harm, you could be breaking the law.
[music] one question you might be wondering about is where did interest in this topic of work design come from? basically we need to go right back to the industrial revolution in the late 1700s. at this time lots of people came to cities to work in factories and the question arose as to how to organise work. frederick taylor's answer to this question was scientific management. which basically involves breaking jobs down into the smallest possible part and then specifying the exact one best way that these small tasks should be carried out. taylor also believed that workers should do the manual work, while managers should do all the mental work. so this meant managers made all the decisions and workers had very little say. scientific management or taylorism, became very popular because it meant that less skilled, and hence, cheaper workers could be employed. training times were also faster because the tasks were so narrow. and efficiency was increased because the individual could do a single task quickly. and then henry ford came along, and ford is the person who manufactured cars on a large scale for the first time. in 1910, ford took the ideas in scientific management further, he introduced the idea of a working assembly line. each worker is assigned a specific assembly task, and the person is stationary while the line mechanically moves and brings the sub-assemblies to the person. with assembly lines, it was possible to make cars faster, but there was a downside. the jobs were very, very repetitive. people had very low skill variety, and they were almost tied to the line, so their autonomy was exceptionally low. over time, workers began to rebel against these poor job designs by going on strike or being absent from work or even sabotaging the quality of the products. and researchers began to observe that these poor work designs affected employees' mental and physical health. interestingly, despite much evidence about the bad effects of these work designs, even today managers still have a tendency to design simplified, narrow jobs that don't give employees much decision making responsibility. it seems to be an ingrained response for many of us to design jobs that look a bit like those in henry ford's automobile factories. reflect back on the result you obtained in the job design assessment. how did you design work? what choices did you make?
[music] we've been talking about what work design is. but what is good work design? and how can you redesign work to make it more effective? one of the earliest work redesign strategies that companies tried was job rotation. this is where people rotate from one job to another. think about people working in a restaurant. one shift, the employee might seat people. the next shift, the employee might take food orders. the next shift, he might serve the food, and so on. you can see that job rotation increases skill variety, which makes the job more interesting. you can also see how rotating across these different jobs would give employees a better understanding of the whole restaurant, which will help them to do their work more effectively. also, when a job is very physically demanding, job rotation can be a good strategy to prevent musculoskeletal strain because different muscles are used across the different tasks. a step on from job rotation is job enlargement. in this strategy, the job is enlarged to include a broader range of tasks. going back to the example of people working in a restaurant, a person might, in a single evening, seat people at their table, take their orders, serve food and water, and then arrange payment. and they might do this for two or three tables across the shift. once again, the job has more skill variety. this enlarged job is also higher in what is called task identity. it is often more meaningful to people when they can see a whole job through from beginning to end. the employee in the restaurant sees the people come in, get seated, eat, enjoy their food, pay and then leave, which can feel more meaningful than just seating people. although job rotation and job enlargement can increase an employee's skill variety and their task identity, neither of these work design strategies improves the employee's level of decision-making responsibility or their level of job autonomy. ultimately, rotation and enlargement are rather limited antidotes to job simplification. this situation improved in the 1960s and 70s when proposals for work redesign focused on increasing employee's autonomy over the planning and execution of their own work, or what is called job enrichment. job enrichment involves vertically enlarging the job, such as by giving a person responsibility for decisions that normally would be undertaken by their supervisor. let's consider this classic study of job redesign, which took place in a bank in the 1990s. before the job enrichment, the bank tellers had rather deskilled jobs. but after the work redesign, instead of bank tellers having to refer commercial checks to specialist tellers, they were trained to be able to carry out all banking transactions. this increased their skill variety. and after the redesign, instead of having to get the supervisor's permission to allow customers to withdraw money, tellers were able to do this themselves as long as there were adequate funds in the customer account. this increased their job autonomy. a rigorous assessment of this job enrichment intervention showed there were positive effects on the teller's job satisfaction and commitment, and in the long term, positive effects on tellers' performance. you may be able to identify similar ways of enriching your own work or the work of the people you manage. there is another type of job redesign that also increases autonomy, and that is self-managing teams. whereas job enrichment applies to an individual job, self-managing teams concerns the redesign of a group of jobs. in self-managing teams, groups of employees work together to achieve shared goals. for example, a team of employees might come together to provide a one-stop shop service to a particular client. autonomy means that the team is responsible for making its own day-to-day decisions, such as deciding who will do which task. self-managing teams, also referred to as autonomous work groups, have been successfully introduced in many organisations, with research showing these almost always result in more satisfying and engaging jobs for people. studies also show positive effects on productivity, for example, because of lower supervisory costs.
[music] you might be wondering at this point, why? that is, why do job enrichment and self managing teams have positive outcomes? here we need to turn to look at some of the theory underpinning work design. one of the most well known theories is hackman and oldham's job characteristics model. this model proposes five core job characteristics, three we've already discussed. skill variety, job autonomy, and task identity. the remaining two are feedback from the job and task significance. feedback means finding out how you are doing as you carry out the work. this is a bit different to getting annual performance feedback in your performance appraisal from a leader about, for example, your strengths and weaknesses. it's more about the day to day feedback you get when you're doing your work. as a nurse, for example, you might receive feedback from the families of patients about how you are doing. sometimes jobs are poorly designed, such that only the manager gets to hear about your performance. task significance refers to whether the job feels like it has impact or makes a difference. for example, if you were a surf lifesaver, and you see that your work is important in saving children from drowning, you will experience a higher level of task significance. the model proposes that these five core job characteristics promote three critical psychological states. in other words, if your job has these characteristics, you will feel your work is meaningful, you will have ownership over the outcomes of your work, and you will have a sense of progress. these feelings then result in higher intrinsic motivation and job satisfaction. and when you're more motivated and satisfied, you're likely to work harder and try to do your best. so your performance is higher. does everyone benefit from having an enriched job? well, the research says no. not everyone will want or need the same work design. people are different in their personality and abilities. as well as their age, and gender, and family responsibilities. all of these factors can shape what type of work design is best for someone. one criticism that's been made about the job characteristics model is that it's rather narrow. my research colleagues and i have argued we need to extend this model to make it more contemporary. we've argued there are important core job characteristics beyond the five. for example, these days, many service jobs have emotional tasks like dealing with dissatisfied customers. this means emotional job characteristics are important even though they weren't in the original theory. some of you might be thinking about your own jobs and wondering, why haven't we talked about the stressful aspects of work? well, there's another important work design theory that focuses on designing healthy work. in 1979, professor robert karasek argued that high job demands and a lack of job control or job autonomy, cause feelings of stress. intuitively we know this is true, and the research bears it out. if you have a lot of demands in your job, such as high levels of time pressure or role overload, you're much more likely to experience work stress and even burnout. if you have low control, this too is negative for physical and mental health. indeed, because of the stress they cause, high job demands and low control can even increase a person's risk of cardiovascular disease. the demand control model goes further. it proposes that greater control can buffer the negative effects of demands. in other words, high demands are okay for health as long as you also have high control. under this situation, a so called active job, you have the autonomy to master your tasks and engage in problem focused coping. which means you will feel challenged and learn, rather than experience stress. on the other hand, if you have a lot of demand, but no control, or what's called a high strain job, then the model argues this is the worst-case scenario for stress. imagine a job in which angry customers return faulty products to the shop. and yet the shop employees don't have the authority to replace the product. that is going to feel very stressful. the job demands model has been extended in recent times, because scholars have recognized that not all demands are bad for people. scholar's have also recognised that, as well as control, other aspects of work can help people cope with high demands, such as having social support. so these days, people talk about a job demands-resources model to indicate that there are other resources beyond control that help people to deal with stressful work demands.
[music] we've talked about what good work design is and some of the theory as to what makes it good. here we're gonna look at the process of redesigning work or how to go about deliberately changing the work design. sometimes work redesign involves just a small set of people, such as when an employee who has been injured is returning to work and it's necessary to redesign his former job to accommodate the injury. at the other end of the spectrum, sometimes work redesign is much larger, part of an organisational redesign or restructure. such as when an organisation decides to implement self-managing teams throughout the whole company. you can imagine, under this situation, it's important to actively manage the change process. two things are super important when it comes to work redesign. first, is the power of participation. it is really important to involve the people whose work is being designed in the process. obviously, it's more motivating and less stressful for people to have a say in how the work is structured. but even more than that, the solution will be better. this is because the people who do the work day in, day out, know the most about it. too many times we see managers and consultants designing work for employees without asking the workers themselves. i suggest going even further. not just consult, but actually involve the workers in the process. a second, very important point, is to remember that if you want to change the work, you need to change the broader systems and practices that support the work design. for example, if you introduce teamwork, you might need to change the selection system to recruit people who like working in teams. or you might need to expand the training offered in the company to include training in team processes. it's also important to think about how people are paid and rewarded. if rewards focus totally on individual contributions, this will not align with the teamwork model. as another example, when self-managing teams are introduced, this can mean a quite radical change in the role of the team leader. rather than being a supervisor who tells people what to do, the role changes. the supervisor needs to become better at coaching people and helping the team to manage its boundary with other teams. these sorts of leadership skills are very different to the more traditional command and control model. so when redesigning work, it's important to think about the ripple effects of the change, for training, selection, leadership, reward systems, and other practices. it's not always easy to redesign work. indeed, it can be very challenging, because it involves changing the traditional power structures in an organisation. but i hope i've convinced you that it's worth making the change. good work design makes a powerful difference to the lives of people at work.
[music] have you ever felt that you have job skills that are not required for your job? or that someone with less job experience than yourself could do your job just as well, or that your previous training is not being fully utilised on your job. if you answered yes to any of these questions, you're one of the 30% of employees that feel overqualified for their jobs. overqualification is when people feel they have more education, skills, abilities, and job experience than required for their jobs. overqualification is quite prevalent in the world. in developed countries, every fourth employee feels overqualified. these numbers are even higher in developing countries. there are two main reasons for the prevalence of overqualification. first some people may know they're overqualified for a job, yet they choose it anyway. perhaps this is the only job available for them and they need to pay bills. or they would like to spend more time on their family, hobbies, or voluntary work and they're happy with whatever job they can get. second, poor job design can explain why some employees become overqualified. if people are employed in boring jobs that lack autonomy, challenge or they do not have opportunities to use their qualifications, they can grow overqualified. being overqualified is problematic for both employees and employers. this is because in general overqualified employees dislike their jobs and are not committed to them. being overqualified takes a toll on psychological and physical well-being of these workers most probably because they feel they are wasting their time on boring jobs. hiring managers are concerned and rightly so that overqualified employees will quit as soon as they find a better alternative. numerous studies support this in that overqualified employees voluntarily quit their jobs. if they don't do that, they engage in counterproductive work behaviors. for example, they put little effort into their work or they day dream or fantasise instead of working. engaging in such behaviors can jeopardise the careers of overqualified workers. but why do they still engage in these behaviors? my research shows that they feel cynical about the meaningfulness of their work, or they may feel angry toward their employment situation. given all these negative consequences of overqualification, shouldn't organisation shy away from hiring these people? the answer is no. think about it. these people have more qualifications than required for a job, and thus they can be productive workers if managed well. so how can we do that? the key is good job design. let's talk about several job design strategies that can minimise the negative consequences of overqualification and maximise the positives. first, make your overqualified people feel empowered and they will feel more satisfied with their jobs and stay longer in the organisation. second, give them more job autonomy, and they will feel better. this is especially true in highly individualistic countries such as australia, the united states, and the united kingdom. third, provide them with more professional growth opportunities and they will stay longer in the organisation. and finally allow them to work with similarly over qualified peers and they will become better employees and better organisational citizens. to summarise, if you are a manager looking at hiring an overqualified employee you should be aware of possible negative consequences. however, if your organisation can design interesting jobs that offer lots of empowerment, autonomy, and professional growth opportunities, you can reap the many benefits of having outstanding, highly qualified employees.
[music] hello everyone. for this week's meet the researcher series, we're having dr. daniela andrei joining us. daniela is a research fellow at the center for safety, uwa. welcome daniela. >> thank you and thank you for inviting me to this series, it's really exciting to be here. >> thank you. >> daniela has a very wide research interest and she is involved in many of our research projects. but today, i'd like to get her to talk about her work on this topic of work design. daniela, can you please tell us a bit more about your project? >> yes, definitely. so this project that i'm working on with professor sharon parker, seeks to understand the way people create work roles for others and what makes them create work roles in particular ways. and this is a very interesting subject for two reasons. first of all, there is a lot of knowledge about the negative outcomes of poorly designed job roles. but despite that, poorly designed roles remain prevalent. and i'm pretty sure everyone of us could easily give an example of a job that we had and that was really poorly designed. and then second, although the recent research showing that people's natural tendency is indeed to create simplified narrow jobs for others, nobody actually looked into why this thing happens. >> i see, that's very interesting. so what did you do exactly in this project? >> well, the most challenging part of this project was to actually measure how people design work roles for others. because it's not something that we could easily observe in our natural environment. so, our first focus was to try to develop some measures like simulations tasks, exercises, that we could use to assess how people design or create jobs. for example, in one of our simulations, we give participants a series of tasks that are performed in a sweets factory, and then we ask them to decide for each task. if it should be performed by a production employee, by an expert, or by a manager. and we are using them together with other survey measures to try to understand or identify why people design jobs in particular ways in our task >> i know your work is still ongoing, but are there some preliminary findings you can share with us? >> yes, we're still analysing data and we're still developing the project, but the initial data that we have indicates that, indeed, our participants are more concerned with efficiency when they design jobs. rather than concerned with creating engaging, stimulating, and motivating jobs for others. and there are different reasons for these, that we see in our data. sometimes, they're just replicating the type of job experience that they had in the past. that is if participants themselves worked in narrow, simplified jobs themselves, then they tend to replicate the same design in our simulations. other times, it can be related to some negative attitudes that they have developed about people's motivation to work in general. for instance, if our participants create narrow simplified highly controlled jobs, it's because sometimes they think that people are naturally dislike work, tend to avoid it, and will only be working if they're attentively supervised. but the good news is that, work design seems to be highly trainable, so our participants learn how to design better jobs. and sometimes even the feedback from going through the simulations help them do so. >> that's very promising to know. thanks very much daniela for sharing your insight with us. >> thank you. [music]
so hi, i'm georgia hay. and i'm a phd student at the center for transformative work design at the university of western australia. [music] so my research is on what we call the anticidence of work design. what that essentially means is trying to understand where work design comes from. so there's a whole research that tells us how important good work design is. and this is where people have autonomy, and they had variety, and they have a say in what happens in their job and in their organization, and they have things like social support. the thing is, though, when we look across the world and how work is designed in different countries, we find that there's a lot of really poor work design. so work that you might think of as sort of boring or monotonous, or where people don't have a lot of variety. they don't have a lot of social support, or a lot of input into what happens in their job and in their organizations. so this research on the antecedents of work design is trying to understand what factors either enable or constrain the emergence of good, well designed work. so, so far, research on this topic is told us a couple of things. firstly, more or less, people kind of have this innate tendency to once you reduce uncertainty of risk by design this really poor work. or these really sort of monotonous jobs and organizations and teams with lots of hierarchy and lots of bureaucracy. we also know that people who have some sort of formal training or experience in work design, perhaps organizational psychologists, tend to design better work. so they tend to give people more autonomy or they tend to make less hierarchical team or organization structures. but what we're kind of beginning to unpack a little bit more and what i've found so far is that, it's often not people with expertise in work design than making decisions that affect work design. it's often people who are making decisions in their role, maybe a sort of department manager or the leader of an organization. and they're making those decisions based on their training, and their expertise in their field, and their professional background. so what my research is trying to understand is how these people in the day-to-day realities of organizational life make decisions about work design. so specifically, i'm looking at how cognitive biases, individual values, and also occupational culture or your professional background might shape how you design work, or your attitudes to work design. also looking at how culture shapes work design. so, when i make decisions about work design for someone else, do i rely on stereotypes, or kind of an ideal prototype of who that person is and what they value and what they need at work? so to do this, i'm conducting in-depth case studies at organizations where there has been a redesign of work. so i've been coming in both before, during, and after the redesign to collect lots of different types of data. to speak to people who have been involved in the decision-making process or who've been affected by it, whose work has been redesigned. looking through documents and also surveys and lots of different types of information to build a picture of why the redesign unfolded the way it did. why those particular decisions were made, what the outcome was, what the new design is, and how effective that is overtime? in conducting these case studies, what we're able to do is to pull all this different information together, and to then feed that back to these organizations and to give them a picture of this redesign process. what were the factors that maybe got in the way if designing a more efficient outcome of designing a more efficient team or program or organization. so that we can open that conversation with them to achieve better work design. so to really kind of compare the knowledge that we have in research and the wealth of research on work design with the realities of design work in practice. and they're the day-to-day perhaps barriers that managers, or executives, or that policy makers face in designing work where people are more engaged, and where people have a say, and have work that has variety and support.